NASA SP-2 14

NASA
SP
214
c. l

science
Report
LOAN COPY:

m mm

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS
AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

I

-

NASA SP-2 1 4
TECH LIBRARY KAFB. NM

Preliminary Science Report

Scientific and Technical Infor?)zzdtiotz Divisiorz
OFFICE OF TECHNOLOGY UTILIZATION

1969

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
Washington, D.C.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The material submitted for the Lunar Surface Scientific Mission of Apollo 11 was reviewed by a NASA
Manned Spacecraft Center Technical Review Board
consisting of the following members: J. M. West (Chairman), P. R. Bell, A. J. Calio, J. W. Harris, H. H. Schmitt,
S. H. Simpkinson, W, K. Stephenson, and D. C.Wiseman.

For sale by the Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical Information, Springfield, Virginia 22151
CFSTl price $3.00

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 77-603770

Foreword
OURFIRST JOURNEY to the Moon ushered in a new era in which man will no
longer be confined to his home planet. The concept of traveling across the
vastness of space to new worlds has stirred the imagination of men everywhere.
One-sixth of the Earth's population watched as the Apollo 1 astronauts walked
1
and worked a quarter of a million miles away.
The success of this mission has opened new fields of exploration and
research - research which will lead to a greater understanding of our planet
and provide a new insight into the origin and history of the solar system. The
1
Apollo 1 mission was only a beginning, however. Subsequent missions will
reflect more ambitious scientific objectives and will include more comprehensive
observations and measurements at a variety of lunar sites.
This document is a preliminary report of the initial scientific observations
resulting from the Apollo 1 mission. We expect that further significant results
1
will come from more detailed analysis of the returned samples of lunar material,
and from additional study of the photographs and data obtained from the
emplaced experiments. Beyond that, we look forward to increasing international
participation in the exploration of the Moon and neighboring regions of our solar
system.
THOMAS PAINE
0.
Administrator
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

PAGE

INTRODUCTION
Robert R. Gilr~ltlxand George M . Low

vii

SUMMARY OF SCIENTIFIC RESULTS
W . N. Hess and A. 1. Calio

1

1 PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY OF APOLLO 11 MISSION
James H . Sasser

2

C R E W OBSERVATIONS
Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Neil A. Armstrong, and Michael Collins

3 GEOLOGIC SETTING OF T H E L U N A R SAMPLES R E T U R N E D
BY T H E APOLLO 11 R4ISSION
E. M. Shoemaker, N . G . Bailey, R. M. Batson, D. H . Dahlem,
T . fI. Foss, A!. J . Grolier, E. N . Godtlarrl, M. H. Hait, H . E. Holt,
K. B. Larson, J . J . Rennilson, G. G . Schaber, D. L. Schleicher,
H . H. Schmitt, R. L. Sutton, G . A. Szoann, A. C . Waters, and
M. N. West
4 APOLLO 11 SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION
N . C . Costes, W . D. Cawier, J. K. Mitchell, ancl R. F. Scott

5 PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION OF L U N A R SARlPLES

G PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERIMENT
Gary V . Latlzanz, Matirice Ewing, Frank Press, George Sutfon,
James Dornzan, Nafi Tokso;, Ralph Wiggins, Yosio Nakanzura,
John Derr, ancl Freclerick Dziennebier

7 L A S E R RANGING R E T R O R E F L E C T O R
C . 0. Alley, P. L. Bender, R. F . Chang, D. G . Czlrrie, R. H. Dicke,
J. E. Fallcr, W. M . Kazlla, 6 . 1 . F . MacDonalcl, J. D. Alz~llxollan~l,
El. II. Plotkin, S. K. Poulfney, D. T . Wilkinson, lrvin Winer,
Walter Carrion, T o m Johnson, Pazil Spadin, Lloyd Robinson,
E. Joseph Wampler, Donald Wieber, E. Silverberg, C . Steggerda,
J . Mtlllenrlore, J. Rayner, IT?.Willicznzs, Brian Warner,
Harvey Richarclson, ancl B. Bopp

8 T H E S O L A R - W I N D COMPOSITION EXPERIMENT
J . Geiss, P. Eberhardt, P. Signer, F . Buehler, and J . Meister
9 L U N A R SURFACE CLOSEUP STEREOSCOPIC PI-IOTOGRAPHY

10 T H E MODIFIED DUST D E T E C T O R IN T H E EARLY
APOLLO SCIENTIFIC EXPERIMENTS PACKAGE
J. R. Bates, S. C . Freden, anti B. J . O'Brien
APPENDIX A - GLOSSARY OF T E R M S
APPENDIX B - ACRONYh4S

9

35

In froduct ion
Robert R. Gilruth and George M . Low

THEMANNED SPACE FLIGHT PROGRAM is dedicated to the exploration and use of
space by man. In the immediate future, men will continue exploring the h/Ioon,
adding greatly to our knowledge of the Moon, the Earth, and the solar system.
I t is expected that in Earth orbital laboratories men will conduct experiments
and make observations that are possible only in the space environment.
In standing firmly behind the space science program, it has been necessary
to provide means for man to live and work in "this new ocean." A transportation
system has had to be provided with a navigation system of great precision. An
extensive medical program has been necessary to provide data on man's reaction
to the space environment. The Mercury, Gemini, and early Apollo missions have
produced, step by step, the answers needed for the Apollo 11 lunar landing
mission.
The rapid progress of the program obscured its great problems. The success
of the Apollo 11 mission was solidly based on excellent technology, sound decisions, and a test program that was carefully planned and executed. To this
foundation was added the skill and bravery of the astronauts, backed up by a
fully trained and highly motivated ground team. I t must not be forgotten that
the lunar mission was very complex from all points of view -planning, hardware, software, and operations. Of necessity, margins were small and even small
deviations in performance or conduct of the mission could have jeopardized
mission success.
In parallel with the emphasis on engineering problems and their solution,
the scientific part of the Apollo 11 mission was planned and executed with great
care. The samples of lunar soil and roclcs returned by the astronauts will add
much detailed scientific information. The photographs and observations of the
crew have already answered some questions man has asked for thousands of
years. The emplaced experiments have yielded data unavailable until now. This
report is preliminary and covers only the initial scientific results of the Apollo 11
mission. Much work remains for the large number of scientists involved to understand and interpret the facts that arc only partly exposed today.

vii

Summary of Scien fif ic Results
W. N . Hess and A. J. Calio

The scientific objectives of the Apollo 11 mission, in order of priority, were the following:
( 1 ) To collect early in the extravehicular activity (EVA) a sample, called the contingency
sample, of approximately 1 kg of lunar surface
material to insure that some lunar material would
be returned to Earth.
( 2 ) To fill rapidly one of the two sample return containers with approximately 10 kg of the
lunar material, called the bulk sample, to insure
the return of an adequate amount of material to
meet the needs of the principal investigators.
( 3 ) To deploy three experiments on the lunar
surface:
( a ) A passive seismometer to study lunar
seismic events, the Passive Seismic Experiment
Package (PSEP)
( b ) An optical corner reflector to study
lunar librations, the Laser Ranging Retroreflector
( LRRR)
( c ) A solar-wind composition (SWC) experiment to measure the types and energies of
the solar wind on the lunar surface
4 ) To fill the second sample return container
with carefully selected lunar material placed into
the local geologic context, to drive two core tubes
into the surface, and to return the tubes with the
stratigraphically organized material, called the
documented sample.
During these tasks, photographs of the surface
were to be taken using a 70-mm Hasselblad camera and a closeup stereoscopic camera ( the Apollo
Lunar Surface Closeup Camera (ALSCC) ). The
scientific tasks and a variety of other tasks were
planned for a 2-hr and 40-min time period.
According to mission plans, the time allotted
for the collection of the documented sample,
which had the lowest priority, would be shortened if time were insufficient. All the scientific
tasks were completed satisfactorily, all instru-

ments were deployed, and approximately 20 kg
of lunar material were returned to Earth. The
documented-sample period was extremely short,
however, and samples collected during this
period were not carefully photographed in place
or documented in other ways.

N a t u r e of t h e Lunar S u r f a c e
The Apollo 11 lunar module ( L M ) landed in
the southwestern part of Mare Tranquillitatis,
approximately 50 km from the closest highland
material and approximately 400 m west of a
sharp-rimmed blocky crater approximately 180 m
in diameter. Rays of ejecta from this crater extend past the landing site. Rays from more distant craters, including the crater Theophilus, are
also in the landing region.
Surface material at the landing site consists of
unsorted fragmental debris ranging in size from
approximately 1m to microscopic particles, which
make up the majority of the material. This debris
layer, the regolith, is approximately 5 m thick in
the region near the landing site, as judged by
the blockiness of material near various-sized
craters.
The soil on the lunar surface is weakly cohesive, as shown by the ability of the soil to stand
on vertical slopes. The fine grains tend to stick
together, procluding clods of material that crumpled under the astronauts' boots. The depth of
the astronauts' footprints and the penetration of
the LM landing gear correspond to static bearing
pressures of approximately 1 psi. The surfaces
were relatively soft to depths of 5 to 20 cm. Deeper
than these depths, the resistance of the material
to penetration increases considerably. In general,
the lunar soil at the landing site was similar in
appearance, behavior, and mechanical properties
to the soil encountered at the Surveyor equatorial

2

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

landing sites. Although the lunar soil differs considerably in composition and in range of particle
shapes from a terrestrial soil of the same particlesize distribution, the lunar soil does not appear to
differ significantly from similar terrestrial soil in
mechanical behavior.
Both rounded and angular rocks appear on the
surface in profusion. All degrees of burial are
present, and fillets on the sides of rocks, caused
by the powdery surface material being piled up
by some erosional process, were common. At least
three of the rocks returned to Earth have been
identified in photographs of the lunar surface. On
what appears to be the upper surface of several
rocks, a thin rind of altered material approximately 1 mm thick is found. This rind is lighter
colored than the remainder of the rock and appears to be caused by shattering of mineral grains.
One outstanding feature of the surfaces of the
rocks returned to Earth is the existence of several glass-lined pits 1mm or smaller in diameter.
These glass-lined pits appear only on the surfaces of rocks. (More of these pits are observed
on the top surfaces of rocks with known orientations.) Quite clearly, these pits are of external
origin. The glass overlaps of the surface of the
rock and the resulting features clearly resemble
hypervelocity impact craters. However, the pits
do not resemble craters made in the laboratory
by hypervelocity particles, and the origin of the
pits is presently unknown.
The most interesting and unexpected surface
features discovered and photographed by the
astronauts are glassy patches on the lunar surface that are described by the astronauts as resembling drops of solder. These patches were
observed only inside several raised-rim craters
approximately 1 m in diameter. These glassy
blebs may be formed by low-velocity molten material splattering into the craters, or they may
be formed from material that has been melted
in place. The section of this document entitled
"Lunar Surface Closeup Stereoscopic Photography" presents an interesting theory of the origin of the blebs, based on radiation heating. This
theory postulates that within the last 100 000
years, the Sun had a superflare or mininova event
that heated the lunar surface to a temperature
that caused material inside the craters to melt,
but did not cause surface material to melt. Ac-

cording to the theory, the reason that material
inside the craters melted while surface material
did not is that a focusing effect caused the temperature inside the craters to increase. This radiation-heating theory is certainly not yet proved,
but no other plausible theories have been advanced to explain the blebs' being located only
in the bottoms of craters. None of the blebs
photographed by the astronauts were returned
in the sample containers, and no blebs have
been identified in the samples.

The Passive Seismic Experiment
Since the time of the Ranger 1 mission, scientists have been trying to land a seismometer on
the surface of the Moon to search for moonquakes. Successful operation of a seismometer
is extremely important for understanding of the
internal structure of a planet and to hsearch for
possible layering or discontinuities. On the Apollo
11 mission, a seismometer was placed on the
surface of the Moon, and the instrument operated satisfactorily for 21 days. The instrument
contained four separate components. Three longperiod ( L P ) (approsimately 15-sec resonance)
seismometers were alined orthogonally to measure surface motion both horizontally and vertically. A single-axis, short-period (SP) seismometer, with a resonant period of approximately
1 sec, measured vertical motion. The system had
tilt adjustment motors to level the system upon
command from Earth. The instrument was deployed on the lunar surface approximately 16 m
from the L M and was turned on while the astronauts were on the lunar surface. Signals were
received when the crewmen climbed the LM
ladder, used a hammer to pound on the core
tubes, and jettisoned equipment, including the
portable life support systems (PLSS ) .
Actual maximum instrument temperature (approximately 190° F ) exceeded the planned maximum instrument temperature by approximately
50° F. Even at this elevated temperature, the
instrument worked satisfactorily during the first
lunar day and during part of the second. However, near noon of the second lunar day, the
instrument no longer accepted commands from
Earth stations; therefore, the experiment was
terminated.

I

SUMMARY O F SCIENTIFIC RESULTS

The LM appears to have been a rich source of
seismic noise. One class of repeating signals of
nearly identical structure that was observed
gradually died out over a period of many Earth
days. These signals seem to be related to events
on the LM such as fuel venting, valve chatter,
or other mechanical motion. The signals had a
dominant frequency of 7.2 Hz before LM ascent
and of 8.0 Hz following ascent. These frequencies appear to be characteristic frequencies of
the LM structure.
Several events showing dispersion and having
the appearance of surface waves were detected
on the LP seismometers. These wave trains often
occurred simultaneously with a series of pulses
on the SP seismometer. I t is not yet certain, but
these waves are probably not the result of real
seismic events but are of instrumental origin.
Several other classes of events of unknown
origins were observed. The following are possible source mechanisms for these observed seismic signals :
(1) Venting gases from the LM and circulating fluids within the LR4
( 2 ) Thermoelastic stress relief within the LM
and the PSEP
( 3 ) Meteoroid impacts on the LM, the PSEP,
and the lunar surface
( 4 ) Displacement of rock material along steep
crater slopes
(5) Moonquakes
( 6 ) Instrumental effects
I t is unclear whether any of the received signals were actually of lunar-seismic-event origin.
One of the most important results of the PSEP
is the discovery that the background noise level
on the Moon is extremely low. At frequencies
from 0.1 to 1 Hz, the background seismic-signal
level for vertical surface motions is less than
0.3 mpm. This level is from 100 to 10 000 times
less than average terrestrial background levels
in the frequency range of 0.1 to 0.2 Hz for microseisms. Continuous seismic background signals
from 10 to 30 mpm were observed on the records
of the horizontal seismometers. These signals
decreased considerably near lunar noon and may
have been due to lunar surface-temperature
changes which tilted the instrument.
Of the many seismic signals recorded, several
were produced by the LM. Many of the signals

3

may be a result of real seismic events and may
be generated by moonquakes, impact events, or
movement of surface rocks. However, none of
the events can be clearly identified as real, and
none of the observed signals has patterns normally observed on recordings of seismic activities occurring on Earth. Clearly, the Moon is not
a very seismic body. Artificial seismic sources,
such as the impact on the lunar surface of the
Saturn IVB stage or the spent LM ascent stage,
will be useful for future lunar seismometers.
Laser Ranging Retroreflector

The LRRR consists of an array of finely machined quartz corners deployed on the lunar surface and aimed at the Earth. The array is used
as a reflector for terrestrial lasers. By measuring
the distance from the laser to the reflector, small
changes in the motion of the Moon or the Earth
can be measured. The goal, when the system is
fully operational, is an uncertainty of 15 cm
( 6 in.). The LRRR will allow studies to be conducted on ( I ) the librations of the Moon, both
in latitude and longitude, ( 2 ) the recession of
the Moon from the Earth caused either by tidal
dissipation or by a possible change in the gravitation constant, and ( 3 ) the irregular motion of
the Earth, including the Chandler wobble of the
pole. The amplitude of the Chandler wobble
seems to vary in time with relation to major
earthquake events.
On the same day the LRRR was deployed satisfactorily on the surface of the Moon, attempts
were made to range on the reflector from the
Lick Observatory in California and from the
McDonald Observatory in Texas. Some time was
required for the ranging attempts to be successful because, initially, there was some uncertainty
as to the location of the landing site. After a few
days, this problem was solved, but ground-instrument difficulties and weather problems caused
further delays. In approximately a week, both
observatories had received signals reflected by
the LRRR. The signals, although weak, were
clearly identifiable. By using this technique, the
distance to the Moon from the Earth has been
measured to an accuracy of approximately 4 m.
It should be noted that the distance to thc Moon
is actually uncertain to a few hunclrcd meters

4

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

because of uncertainties in the velocity of light.
However, the distance expressed in light seconds
is accurate to approximately one part in lo8,
which is consistent with the 4-m accuracy discussed previously.
The LRRR experiment will continue for months
or years before final data are obtained on many
of the detailed measurements to be undertaken.

The Solar-Wind Composition Experiment
For some time, direct measurements have been
made of the solar wind, establishing the presence
of approximately 5 percent helium ions in the
solar-wind stream, which is composed predominantly of protons. The solar wind is expected to
contain many heavier ions, probably representative of solar composition, but no direct measurements of these heavier species have yet been
made. It now seems quite likely that the rare gas
measured in the powdery lunar samples is of
solar-wind origin, but this rare-gas source may
be confused with other gas sources. The measured rare gas represents an integration of the
solar wind into the soil over a period of many
millions of years.
An experiment was conducted during the
1
Apollo 1 mission to measure heavier elements
in the solar wind directly. A thin aluminum foil
of 4000 cm3 was deployed on the surface of the
Moon facing the Sun. The solar-wind particles
were expected to penetrate approximately 10-5
cm into the foil and to be firmly trapped there.
The foil was collected after 77 min, placed inside
one of the sample-return containers, and brought
to the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory ( LRL) .
Approximately 1 ft3 of the foil was removed
in the LRL, sterilized by heat at 125' C for 39 hr,
and sent to Switzerland for analysis. Several small
pieces of the foil, each approximately 10 cm2,
werc cleaned by ultrasonic methods, and the
noble gases were then extracted for analysis in a
mass spectrometer. I-Ielium, neon, and argon
were found, and their isotopic composition was
measured. The results correspond generally to
solar abundances and are clearly nonterrestrial. More complete results will be presented
wl~cnthe major portion of the foil has been
analyzed.

The Lunar Samples
Of the 22 kg of returned lunar material, 11 kg
1
are rock fragments larger and 1 kg are smaller
than 1 cm in size. This material may be divided
into the following four groups:
Type A - fine-grained vesicular crystalline
igneous rock.
Type B - medium-grained crystalline igneous
rock.
Type C - breccia.
Type D - fines (less than 1 cm in size).
The crystalline rocks contain mineral assemblages, crystal sizes, and gas cavities, indicating
that the rocks were crystallized from lavas or
near-surface melts. I t is uncertain whether the
lavas were impact generated or of internal origin.
Twenty crystalline rocks were found in the returned sample, 10 rocks of type A and 10 of
type B. Individual rocks weighed up to 919 g.
The type A rocks contain vesicles of 1 to 3 mm
in diameter faced with brilliant crystals. (Most
vesicles are spherical but some are ovate.) There
are also irregular cavities, or vugs, into which
crystals and other groundmass minerals project.
The percentages of the minerals present in type
A rocks are clinopyroxene, 53 percent; plagioclase, 27 percent; opaques (including abundant
ilmenite, minor troilite, and native iron), 18 percent; and other translucent phases, and a minor
amount of olivine, 2 percent. Except for the high
content of opaques, which reflects the high iron
and titanium content, the mineralogy and chemistry of the rocks resemble terrestrial olivinebearing basalts.
The dark-brownish-gray speckled type B rock
is granular in texture and generally resembles
terrestrial microgabbros. The grain sizes are from
0.2 to 3 mm. The percentages of minerals in type
B rocks are as follows: clinopyroxene, 46 percent;
plagioclase, 31 percent; opaques (mainly ilmenite), 1 percent; cristobalite, 5 percent; and other
1
minerals, 7 percent. No olivine is present in type
B rocks. Other unidentified minerals have been
found. The complete absence of hydrous mineral
phases in type A or type B rocks and the presence of free iron places a low limit on the amount
of water present in the melt from which the
rocks crystallized. The water content in the lunar

5

SUMMARY O F SCIENTIFIC RESULTS

material is considerably lower than the water
content in terrestrial basalts.
All the breccias are mixtures of fragments of
different rock types similar to type A or type B
rocks and are mixtures of angular fragments and
sphericles of glass of a variety of colors and a
variety of indices of refraction. Evidence of
strong shock is present in many type C rocks.
These rocks vary from being very friable and
soft to being as hard as the crystalline rocks.
Evidence points to the breccias being formed
by shock cementing or by lithification of the
powdery lunar surface material. Both techniques
of breccia formation are probably the result of
impact events.
Fines were returned to Earth in the bulksample container and in the core tubes. The core
tubes showed no stratification of fines, and the
material was, in general, similar to the bulksample fines. The type D material consists of a
variety of glasses, plagioclase, clinopyroxene,
ilmenite, and olivine. A few Ni-Fe spherules up
to 1mm in diameter were found. Glasses, which
make up approximately 50 percent of type D
material, are of three types: (1) vesicular, globular dark-gray fragments; ( 2 ) pale or colorless
angular fragments with refraction indices of approximately 1.5 to 1.6; ancl ( 3 ) spheroidal, ellipsoidal, dumbbell-shaped, and teardrop-shaped
bodies. Most of these glass types are smaller than
0.2 mm and range in color from red to brown to
green to yellow with refraction indices ranging
from 1.55 to 1.8. Unlike most terrestrial magnetic
glasses, many single glass particles are inhomogeneous. Like the Ni-Fe spherules, the type 3
rounded glass bodies seem to indicate melting
induced by strong shock. In fact, evidence for
shock is common in the fines and in the breccias.
However, only a few crystalline rocks show evidence of strong shock in places other than near
the surface pits.
A chemical analysis of several samples of all
four types of glass was made using optical emission spectroscopy. A few samples were also analyzed using atomic absorption procedures. All
four types of lunar material samples have been
studied, and all types appear to be quite similar
chemically. There is no similar material common
on Earth. Several of the refractory metals are
very prominent. On Earth, a deposit containing

from 5 to 10 percent titanium is rare and might be
considered a titanium mine. Zirconium, yttrium,
and chromium are also present in amounts substantially larger than might be expected in
terrestrial basalts.
Another characteristic of the samples is that
they are low in alkali and volatile elements such
as sodium, potassium, rubidium, lead, and bismuth. Aside from this characteristic and the very
low water content mentioned previously, the
material might be considered to be similar to
terrestrial basalts. Because of the enrichment of
the refractory elements and the depletion of the
volatile elements, it is tempting to consider the
material to be similar to a cinder, being the end
product of a high-temperature environment, to
explain these modifications.
The rare-gas content of lunar samples has
been measured by mass spectroscopy. The content of beryllium, neon, argon, krypton, and
xenon has been measured in several samples.
The total rare-gas content in the fines and breccias is approximately 0.1 cc/g, which is quite
high. These gases were found in the outside
layer of the crystalline rocks, but the gas content
found inside these rocks was very low. The gases
were found throughout the breccias, further indicating that the breccias are formed, probably by
shock, from the fines. Quite clearly, most of the
measured rare gas is from the solar wind. Although no isotopic ratios have been measured
previously for solar rare gases, the values obtained from the preliminary examination compare well with the values that would theoretically
be expected.
Several of the rocks measured contained radiogenic "Ar, which, when coupled with data on
potassium abundance, enables dating of the time
of crystallization of the rocks by using the decay
process
40Ar440K e +
(1)

+

This process gives an age of 3.0+0.7X109 yr,
which shows that the surface of the maria is
older than had been expected.
Age dating can also be accomplisEled by measuring the amount of certain isotopes that are
produced by cosmic ray bombardment of the
lunar surface. This technique yields the time
that the rocks within a few feet of the lunar sur-

6

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

face have been exposed to cosmic rays. The rocks
studied had cosmic-ray-exposure ages from 20X
l o 6 to 160X106yr.
The organic content of the samples was studied
by two techniques: ( 1 ) pyrolysis with flame ionization detection and ( 2 ) mass spectroscopy.
The amount of extractable organic material with
temperatures to 500' C is less than 1 part per
million ( ppm) . Some organic contaminants were
introduced into the samples by recovery and
processing in the LRL, and it is uncertain whether
an indigenous organic material exists in the
samples.
Several samples have been counted in the LRL
Radiation Counting Laboratory. The gamma
rays measured show the presence of several
cosmic-ray-induced radionuclides and the presence of thorium, uranium, and potassium. The
uranium and thorium concentrations are near the
concentration values of these elements found in
terrestrial basalts; however, the amount of potassium present in the lunar samples is lower than
that in terrestrial basalts and is comparable to
the amount found in chondritic meteorites.
Conclusions

The major findings have been as follows:
( 1 ) By using a fabric and mineralogy basis,
the rocks can be divided into two genetic groups:
fine- and medium-grained crystalline rocks of
igneous origin and breccias of complex origin.
( 2 ) The crystalline rocks, as shown by their
modal mineralogy and bulk chemistly, are different from terrestrial rock and meteorites.
( 3 ) Erosion has occurred on the lunar surface
in view of the fact that most of the lunar rocks
are rounded, and some of the rocks have been
exposed to a process that gives then1 a surface
appearance similar to sandblasted rocks. There
is no evidence of erosion by surface water.
( 4 ) The probable presence of the assemblage
iron-troilite-ilmenite and the absence of any
hydrated phase indicate that the crystalline rocks
were formed under extremely low partial pressures of oxygen, water, and sulfur. (Pressures
are in the range of equilibrium pressures found
within most meteorites.)
( 5 ) The absence of hydrated minerals suggests that no surface water has existed at Tran-

quility Base at any time since the rocks in this
region were exposed.
( 6 ) Evidence of shock or impact metamorphism is common in the lunar rocks and fines.
( 7 ) All the rocks have glass-lined surface pits
that may have been caused by the impact of
small particles.
( 8 ) The fine material and the breccia contain
large amounts of all the noble gases which have
elemental and isotopic abundances indicative of
origin in the solar wind. The fact that interior
samples of the breccias contain these gases implies that the samples were formed at the lunar
surface from material previously exposed to the
solar wind.
( 9 ) *OK -*OAr measurements on igneous rocks
show that they crystallized from 3 X lo9 to 4 X 10"
yr ago. The presence of nuclides produced by
cosmic rays shows that the rocks have been
within 1 m of the surface for periods of 20X106
to 160X106 yr.
(10) The level of indigenous organic material
capable of volatilization or pyrolysis, or both,
appears to be extremely low, that is, considerably
less than 1ppm.
(11) Chemical analyses of 23 lunar samples
show that all rocks ancl fines generally are chemically similar.
(12) The elemental constituents of lunar samples are the same as those found in terrestrial
igneous rocks and meteorites. However, the following significant differences in composition
were observed: some refractory elements (for
example, titanium and zirconium) are notably
enriched, and the alkali and some volatile elements are depleted.
(13) Elements that are enriched in iron meteorites (i.e., nickel, cobalt, and the platinum
group) were not observed; such elements are
probably low in abundance.
(14) Of 12 radioactive species identified, two
were cosmogenic radionuclides of short half life,
namely 53Mn (5.7 days) and *$V (16.1 days).
(15) Uranium and thorium concentrations are
near the typical concentrations of these elements
found in terrestrial basalts; however, the potassium-to-uranium ratio determined for lunar surface material is much lower than such ratios
determined for terrestrial rocks or meteorites.
(16) No evidence of biological material has

SUMMARY O F SCIENTIFIC RESULTS

been found to date in the lunar samples.
(17) The lunar soil at the landing site is predominantly fine grained, granular, slightly cohesive, and incompressible. The bardness of the
lunar soil increases considerably at a depth of
15 cm. The soil is similar in appearance and behavior to the soil encountered at the Surveyor
equatorial landing sites.
(18) The PSEP deployed on the Moon operated satisfactorily for 21 days and detected
several seismic signals, many of which originated
from astronaut activity or mechanical motions of
the LM. It is uncertain whether any actual lunar
seismic events were detected. The seismic-noise

background is much less on the Moon than on
Earth.
(19) The LRRR was deployed on the Moon
and has been used as a target for Earth-based
lasers. The distance to the Moon has now been
measured to within an accuracy of approximately
4 m. Future stt~dies
will be made on the variation
of this distance to study in detail the motion of
the Moon and the Earth.
(20) Preliminary analysis has been made on
part of the aluminum SWC foil. Helium, neon,
and argon have been found in the analysis, and
the isotopic composition of each element has
been measured.

7. Photographic Summary of Apollo 7 7 Mission
James H. Sasser

The geographical exploration of new frontiers
has usually occurred many years before scientists visited and studied the areas in detail. For
example, the existence of Antarctica as a continent was known from the time Charles Wilkes
explored 1500 miles of the coastline in 1840.
However, extensive Antarctic exploration did
not begin until the 20th century with the voyages of Scott, Amundsen, Shackleton, and Byrd.
It was not until the International Geophysical
Year (July 1957 to December 1958) that scientists from 12 countries began conducting an
ambitious Antarctic research program. In this
respect, the first manned lunar exploration was
unique. The scientific experiments were carefully planned, and the astronauts were trained
as surrogates for scientists representing many
disciplines.
A brief description of the Apollo 1 mission,
1
illustrated with photographs taken by the astronauts during the mission, is presented. All photography in this chapter was taken on 70-mm
film with Hasselblad cameras except figure 1.
The cameras have a motor-driven mechanism
powered by two nickel-cadmium batteries to
advance the film and cock the shutter after each
picture is taken. The photographs taken from
the command module (Cbl) were made with 80or 250-mm lenses. The lunar surface photography was taken with 80- and 60-mm lenses. The
small crosses seen in the lunar surface photography are reseau marks that are used for calibration purposes during postflight data reduction.
A 16-mm sequence camera for data acquisition
was used to document many phases of the
mission.
During the mission, 9 magazines of 70-mm film
and 13 magazines of 16-mm film were exposed.
The black and white photography was taken on
type 3400 Panatomic-X film emulsion on a 2.5-

mil Estar polyester base. Ektachrome E F S016S
color film on a 2.5-mil Estar polyester base was
exposed on the lunar surface. Thc higher speed
of this color film was expected to be more suitable for lunar surface photography because of
t l ~ elow light levels anticipated and confirmed
to exist on the lunar surface. Other color 70-mm
exposures of the Earth and Moon were taken
on Ektachrome MS S036S color reversal film
on a 2.5-mil Estar polyester base.
The 16-mm film taken during lunar module
( L M ) descent provided the first accurate knowledge of the exact landing point on the lunar
surface. The 70-mm photographs taken on the
lunar surface provided panoramic views of the
surface near the landed LM and allowed detailed topographic mapping of the lunar surface
near the landing point.
The photographs shown are only a sample of
those obtained. Study of the photography will
continue for many years.
Launch, Earth Orbit, and Translunar Coast

The Apollo 1 spacecraft was launched at
1
13:32:01 G.m.t. on July 16, 1969, from Cape
Kennedy, Florida. All times indicated later in
this chapter are stated in hours and minutes
from launch time (ground elapsed time (g.e.t.)),
to the nearest minute. At 3 min after launch,
Saturn V first-stage (S-IC) engine cutoff and
second-stage ( S-11 ) engine ignition occurred,
and the launch escape tower was jettisoned. At
9 min after launch, S-I1 engine cutof? and thirdstage (S-IVB) engine ignition took place.
Earth-orbit insertion of the spacecraft was
achieved at 12 min after launch.
After 2 hr and 33 min in Earth orbit, the
S-IVB engine was reignited for acceleration of
the spacecraft to the velocity required for Earth-

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

gravity escape. At 3:17 g.e.t., the command and
service module (CSM) was separated from the
S-IVB, turned around, and docked with the
LM. The LM was removed from the S-IVB at
4:17 g.e.t.
Provision was made in the flight plan for four
midcourse corrections (using the service module
propulsion system to refine the spacecraft trajectory); however, the only necessary midcourse
correction took place at 26:45 g.e.t. Lunar-orbit
insertion of the spacecraft began at 75:.50 g.e.t.

FIGURE1-1.- O n July 16, 1969, at 9:32 A.M. e.d.t., 7%
million lb of thrust lifted the Apollo-Saturn V spacccraft carrying Astrcnauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael
Collins, ancl Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., from the launch
site at Cape Kennedy.

FIGURE1-2. - Shortly after tr anslunar
insertion, the astronauts photographed Tropical Storm Bf rrnice in
the western Pacific Ocean off the
coast of Baja California. (NASA
AS 11-38-5398)

11

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

FIGURE - Compare this westward
1-3.
view ( NASA ASll-36-5300) of the
central portion of Baja California,
taken shortly after the spacecraft
left Earth orbit on a trajectory to
the Moon, with thc next picture.

1-4. - This view
(NASA
AS11-36-5308 ) of the southern
portion of the North American
Continent shows Baja California
again, the coast of sol~thernCalifornia, and th e ~nountains of
Mexico.

'IGURE

12

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE - Separation of the CShl
1-5.
from the S-IVB occurred at 3:17
g.e.t. The panels that protected the
LM during launch were ejected,
and the CSM was docked with the
LM at 3:25 g.e.t. This photograph
(NASA ASll-36-5313) was taken
shortly before docking.

FIGURE - This photograph (NASA
1-6.
AS11-36-5355) of the Earth, taken
from a distance of more than
100 000 n.mi., was made approximately 25 hr after launch. The
Eastern Ilemispherc was remarkably cloud-free.

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

Lunar Orbit
The lunar-orbit insertion maneuver was begun
at 75:50 g.e.t. The spacecraft was placed in an
elliptical orbit (61 by 169 n.mi.), inclined 1.25'
to the lunar equatorial plane. At S0:12 g.e.t., the
service module propulsion system was reignited,
and the orbit was made nearly circular (66 by
54 n.mi.) above the surface of the Moon. During
each 2-hr orbit, the terminator (the line between
daylight and darkness) moved westward across
the Moon at the rate of approximately ?ideg per
hour (30 km per orbit).
During the 59 hr and 34 min of spacecraft
lunar orbit, approximately 210' of the lunar
surface below the spacecraft orbit was illuminated by the Sun and could be photographed.

13

At the orbital altitude, the lunar horizon was
approximately 300 n.mi. from the spacecraft
nadir.
Photographs taken from lunar orbit provide
synoptic views for the study of regional lunar
geology. The photographs are used for lunar
mapping and geodetic studies, and they have
been valuable in training the astronauts for
future lunar missions. The following selected
photographs, taken from lunar orbit, are arranged in geographical sequence from the farside terminator to the nearside terminator, without regard to the times at which they were
taken. The regions of the Moon covered by the
selected photographs are plotted on the map
that follows.

FIGURE -This diagram shows the approximate areal coverage plot of selected orbital
1-7.
photographs.

14

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE1-8. - The view in this photograph ( NASA ASll-42-6276)
is
toward the northeast near the farside terminator. The view is centered at 10" N, 163" W. The features shown are not namecl.

FIGURE 1-9. -The far side of the
Moon is pictured, looking south.
The features included in this view
havc not yet been named. The coordinates of the center of this
photograph (NASA AS1142-6248)
are approxinlately So S, 164" W.

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

15

FIGURE
1-10. - The center of this
photograph (NASA ASll44-6608)
is located approximately 10" S, 177"
W, and shows the view to the
southwest from the spacecraft.
Note the smooth mare-type fill in
the valleys in the foreground.

1-11. - The view looks northwest across Mare Crisium (the Sen
of Crises ). The large, dark-floored
crater Firmicus is in the foreground.
The average elevation of the highlands is sevcral thousand meters
a b o e the floor of the mare. (NASA
~
AS1142-6222 )

%GUILE

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

16

1-12. - The craters Messier,
Messier A, and Messier B are
grouped in the center of this photograph (NASA AS11-42-6227),
looking westward across Mare Fecunditatis. Messier appears nearest
the center of the photograph, Messier A is above Messier, and Messier B is below and to the right of
Messier.

~IGURE

1-13, - This is a telephoto
view of the craters Messier and
Messilsr A. The atypical shape of
these craters has caused considerable controversy concerning the
mode of origin. (NASA A S l l 4 2 6305 )

'IGURE

17

PHOTOGRAPI-IIC SUMMARY

FIGURE1-14. -This view is looking
southward across the crater Theophilus, which is approximately 60
miles in diameter. To the east of
Theophilus is Madler, a crater approximately 1 4 miles in diameter.
The center of the view is located
approximately 11" S, 29" E.
( NASA A S l l 4 2 - 6 2 3 7 )

1-15
bine and
landiing r
6092' )

FIGURE

The twir craters Saitter lie 3eyond the
(T'IAS A AS 11-41-

18

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

1-16. - Beyond the landing
site, looking toward the sunrise terminator on the Moon, the craters
Sabine and Ritter lead into the
c
highlands b :tween the Sea of Tranquility (Mare Tranquillitatis) and
the Central Bay (Sinus Medii).
(NASA AS1.141-6094 )

'IGURE

FIGURE 1-17. - The lunar highlands
west of the Sea of Tranquility stand
out in stark relief when illuminated
by the morning Sun. The twin
craters Sabine and Ritter are in the
right foreground, and the crater
Schmidt is in the central foreground. (NASA ASll41-6123)

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

Lunar Module Descent and Landing

~h~ LM, with A~~~~~~~~ A~~~~~~~ and
Aldrin aboard, was undocked from the CSM at
100:14 g.e.t., following a thorough check of all
the LM systems. The CSM (radio call sign
"Columbia") was maneuvered away from the
LM (radio call sign "Eagle"). At 101:36 g.e.t.,

19

the LM descent engine was fired for approximately 29 sec, and the descent to the lunar surface began. At lo2:33 g.e.t., the LM descent
engine was started for the last time and burned
until touchdown on the lunar surface. Eagle
landed on the Moon 102 hr, 45 min, and 40 sec
after launch.

FIGURE -Eagle was photographed from Columbia by Astronaut Collins at the moment
1-18.
the two spacecraft undocked. (NASA A S l l - 4 6 6 5 6 6 )

20

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE
1-19. - Shortly after undocking, Eagle was rotated to permit a
visual inspection by Astronaut Collins in Columbia. The probes that
extend downward from three of the
LM footpads sensed contact with
the surface during touchdown.
( NASA AS 1144-6584 )

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

21

FIGURE
1-20( b ) . - An almost vertical
view (NASA AS11-37-5447) of
Columbia over the LM landing site.

FIGURE1-20( c ) . - A vertical view
( NASA AS11-37-5448 ) of Columbia almost 60 n.mi. above the crater
Schmidt as the two spacecraft approach the terminator.

22

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

Lunar Surface Activities

lmmediately after landing on the Moon,
Astronauts Armstrong and Aldrin prepared the
LM for liftoft: as a contingency measure. A series
of photographs was taken through the LM windows during this activity; and when the simulated liftoff countdown was completed, the
astronauts ate. Following the meal, a scheduled
sleep period was postponed at the astronauts'
request, and the astronauts began preparations
for descent to the lunar surface.
Astronaut Armstrong emerged from the spacecraft first. While descending, he released the
Modularized Equipment Stowage Assembly
(MESA) on which the surface television camera
was stowed, and the camera recorded man's first
step on the Moon at 109:24:19 g.e.t. A sample of
the lunar surface material was collected and
stowed to assure that, if a contingency required
an early end to the planned surface activities.
samples of lunar surface material would be returned to Earth. Astronaut Aldrin subsequently
descended to the lunar surface.

Before EVA

The astronauts carried out the planned sequence of activities that included deployment
of a Solar Wind Composition (SWC) experiment, collection of a larger sample of lunar surface material, panoramic photographs of the
region near the landing site and the lunar horizon, closeup photographs of inplace lunar surface material, deployment of a Laser-Ranging
Retroreflector (LRRR) and a Passive Seismic
Experiment Package (PSEP), and collection of
two core-tube samples of the lunar surface.
Approximately 2%hours after descending to the
surface, the astronauts began preparations to reenter the LM, after which the astronauts slept.
The ascent from the lunar surface began at
124:22 g.e.t., 21 hr and 36 min after the lunar
landing.
The photographs reproduced in this section
consist of mosaics (photographs joined together
to form panoramic views) and single photographs (to show more detail in specific areas).
The single photographs are arranged in the
sequence in which they were taken.

PHOTOGRAPI-IIC SUMMARY

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

Panorama of the lunar surface looking northwest

Panorama of the lunar surface looking south

Panorama of the lunar surface looking north

FIGURE
1-23. - Additional panoramas from the lunar surface.

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

FIGURE
1-25. - The SWC experiment
is unrolled and turned to face the
Sun. The experiment was deployed
on the surface for approximately 1
hr and 17 min. The linear trails
from the foreground toward the LM
were formed by the cable of the
surface television camera. (NASA
AS 1140-5872)

26

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

1-26. - Note the rounded,
eroded appearance ~f the rock in
the right foreground. (NASA AS1140-5875 )

~IGURE

FIGURE 1-27. - The astronaut photographed his own footprint to permit
later study of the lunar surface
bearing strength. The thin, crusty
appearance of the surface was similar to that discovered during the
Surveyor soil mechanics experiments. ( NASA ASll-40-5877)

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

27

1-29. -The LRRR and the
PSEP are being removed from thc
MESA in the Lhl descent stage.
The Apollo Lunar Surface Closeup
Camera ( ALSCC ), n~hichprovides
stereoscopic pictures of the fine
surface structure, is in the forcground. The television camera can
be seen bcyond and to the right
of the SWC. (NASA ASll-405931)

'IGURE

28

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

1-30. -The LRRR and the
PSEP are carried to the deployment area. The surface was softer
near the rim of the small crater in
the foreground, as can be seen by
the depth of Astronaut Aldrin's
footprints. ( NASA AS 1140-5944 )

FIGURE

FIGURE1-31. -The LRRR has been
set up to face the Earth, and the
PSEP is being leveled. The PSEP
was placed behind the large rock
to shield the experiment from the
effects of liftoff. (NASA A S l l 4 0 5949 )

29

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

FIGURE1-32. - Shortly before entering the LM, Astronaut Armstrong
walked back approximately 200 ft
eastward to photograph the interior
of a crater he noted during descent.
The ALSCC is in the foreground.
( NASA ASll40-5957)

1-33. - Tranquility Base is
shown from the rim of the crater
shown in the previous photograph.
Astronaut Armstrong's shadow is in
the left foreground, and the shadow
of the ALSCC is in the right foreground. ( NASA ASll40-5961)

'IGURE

30

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE
1-34. - The astronaut is collecting a core-tube sample for later study by scientists.
The SWC experiment is still deployed. (NASA ASll-40-5964)

The Return to Earth

At 124:22 g.e.t., the engine of the LM ascent
stage was ignited, and a series of maneuvers was
begun to permit rendezvous with Astronaut
Collins in the CM. Docking took place at 12S:03
g.e.t. Astronauts Armstrong and Aldrin transferred to the CM, and the LM ascent stage was
jettisoned at 130:09 g.e.t. The service module
(SM) engine was reignited at 13534 g.e.t. to increase the spacecraft velocity by 3279 fps for
escape from lunar orbit.

In transearth coast, as in translunar coast, only
one of four planned midcourse corrections was
required. This midcourse correction was performed at 150:30 g.e.t. The SM was separated
from the CM at 194:49 g.e.t. The CM entered
the atmosphere of the Earth with a velocity of
36 194 fps and landed in the Pacific Ocean 195
hr, 1s min, and 35 sec after launch. Procedures
to prevent biological back-contamination of the
Earth were followed in recovering the crew, the
lunar samples, and the spacecraft.

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

31

-36. - Near 88" E, the two
spacecr aft ap~proach h4are Smythii
as the Earth rises above the 1unar
horizon . (NA.SA AS 1144-664 2 )

32

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE - A nearly full Moon is viewed from a perspective never seen from Earth,
1-37.
approximately 60" E. The LM landing site is far to the west in this view.
( NASA A S 1 1 4 6 6 6 6 5 )

PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY

FIGURE - A crescent Earth awaits the return of the first men to set foot on the Moon.
1-38.
(NASA AS11-44-6689)

33

2. Crew Observations
Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Neil A. Armstrong, and Michael Collins

The Apollo 1 mission offered us our first
1
opportunity to observe directly the operational
and scientsc phenomena associated with landings on the lunar surface. The lunar module
(LM) crew participated in two mission-oriented
geologic field trips and also attended several
tens of hours of briefings dealing with the observational aspects of the mission. These briefings
included sessions on basic. geologic principles,
rock and mineral identification and interpretation, impact geology, Surveyor program results,
lunar surface visibility characteristics, landing
site recognition, and LM landing characteristics.
In addition, considerable planning and simulation time was devoted to preparation for the
evaluation of extravehicular mobility, a vital
feature to scientific endeavors on the lunar
surface.
Landing and Ascent

We had trained to some extent on the specific
topographic characteristics of the site 2 landing
area to be able to identify our final landing
point, an important requirement for later missions. Operational problems during the early
visibility phase of final descent prevented observation of those features that would have enabled
us to locate our final landing point soon after
touchdown. Postmission examination of the descent sequence photography showed several
features we had been trained to recognize;
therefore, we feel that it will be feasible to
locate landing points on future missions.
When we were first able to observe the terrain
ahead of us ( a t an altitude of about 2000 ft and
about 1 mile uprange), it was clear that we
would land in the vicinity of a blocky rim crater
about 200 yd in diameter. This crater was later
identified as one we had informally called West
Crater during our prelaunch training. The

blocky area just north of West Crater was initially considered for a landing site because of
its obvious scientific interest; but as we approached this area, it proved to be too rough
for landing because of the numerous large and
blocky rocks, many larger than 5 or 10 ft in size.
We elected to overfly this area in preference
for the smoother spots a few hundred yards
farther west. As we proceeded west, it was
noted that several relatively open areas existed
between raylike fields of boulders. Our final
approach was chosen to lie between two of these
boulder fields.
The site where we eventually landed was a
relatively smooth area; however, craters varying
in diameter from 1 to perhaps 50 ft were present
in the near vicinity of the touchdown point.
Crater density in this area appeared to be inversely proportional to crater size; for example,
the small-diameter craters were much more
abundant than those having a large diameter.
Several subdued ridges 20 to 30 ft high were
within our field of view but were some distance
from the spacecraft. In addition, a long boulder
field with many boulders averaging at least 2 ft
in diameter was several hundred feet north of
the landing point.
A large amount of fine lunar material appeared to be moved during the terminal phase
of landing. The streaming dust was first evident
at about 100 ft in altitude and thickened to
about 75 percent loss of visibility at touchdown.
The path of this expelled material was parallel
to the lunar surface, and the material seemed to
travel a great distance (over the horizon) at a
high velocity. The dominant effect of the streaming dust was to partially obscure and distort the
details of the surface and to make it difficult to
judge the horizontal velocity of the LM. After
the engine was shut down, there was no visual

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

36

evidence that the expelled material was deposited anywhere on top of the surrounding surface, and no lingering cloud of dust was
observed. No lunar dust was observed later during liftoff; however, separation debris observed
at this time appeared to have a long flightpath
similar to the path exhibited by the lunar material that was expelled during the terminal
phase of landing. One piece of debris was
observed to follow below us for several miles
before impacting the surface.
General Surface Characteristics
Color

The general color of the surface as viewed
close at hand is comparable to that we observed
from orbit at the same Sun elevation of about
10'. Actually, the surface is pretty much without
color other than shades of gray. Along the zero
phase angle line (down Sun), the color is a
light, chalky gray wit11 a tan shade. As one looks
toward 90' to the sunline, the color becomes a
darker ashen gray with no apparent tan shades.
At all phase angles, the surfaces of rock fragments appear to be a lighter gray than their
immediate surroundings; however, where such
fragments are freshly broken, the broken surfaces are very dark gray, much like country
basalt. Small gradations in color resulting from
very small topographical changes were visible.
Upon looking closely at the surface material
(particularly the fine soil) during our excursion,
we observed a charcoal-gray to gray-cocoa color.
similar to that of a graded lead pencil.
Craters

Many, if not most, of the larger craters in the
immediate vicinity of the LM appeared to be
somewhat elongate secondary craters. Except
for a few of the smaller craters, almost all the
craters we observed had raised rims; l~owever,
no rims were truly sharp. Other than West
Crater, we did not observe a crater whose rim
had a noticeably greater abundance of rock
fragments than its surroundings had. Also, there
were no observed indications of fragments having rolled down the sides of craters.
The floors of craters near Tranquility Base
generally have about the same fragment concen-

tration as the rims have. The only exception to
this was the 33-ft-diameter, 15- to 20-ft-deep
crater about 200 ft east of the LM. This crater
had a mound of large rocks grouped slightly off
center that were much larger and more numerous on the bottom than on the wall or rim of
the crater.
Rock Fragments

Rock fragments of a wide range of size, angularity, and textural types were observed both
from the LM window and during our extravehicular activities. Although some rock fragments were obviously lying on top of the surface, it was not always possible to judge their
depth of burial. In one case, a relatively angular
fragment resembling a distributor cap was found
to have most of its volume extending about a
foot underground, with a flat shelf at ground
level around the exposed part. In another instance, a rock about 1 ft high, 1% long, and
ft
?I thick was apparently standing on edge,
ft
although its depth of burial was unknown. In
the course of our use of the scoop, we encountered rocks buried under several inches of soil.
The major textural types of the rock fragments
we observed were as follows: plain, evengrained basaltlike rocks; obviously vesicular
basaltlike rocks; basaltic-appearing rocks with
1 to 5 percent small white minerals; and rocks
consisting of aggregated smaller fragments. In
some instances, loosely aggregated clods of soil
were difficult to distinguish from rock fragments
until they were disturbed and broken up.
Some of the rocks that appeared to be vesicular at first glance were actually not vesicular.
Instead, they were surficially pitted by what
appeared to be small impact craters.
In addition to the rock fragments, we
observed smaller pieces of material that had n
metallic luster and resembled blobs of solder
splattered on an irregular surface. These pieces
of material were concentrated in scattered
aggregates at the bottoms of six or eight 3- or
4-ft-diameter craters. Elsewhere, several examples of lunar material that seemed to be
transparent crystals were observed on the surface. These crystallike materials resembled
quartz crystals and appeared to be opaque from
some views and translucent from other views.
There were also small sparkly fragments that

C R E W OBSERVATIONS

resembled biotite; however, these fragments
could not be examined closely. I t was not possible to collect samples of these unusual materials at the time they were observed, and during
the sampling periods, none of these materials
were found. The solderlike material was photographed, however, using the closeup stereoscopic camera.
Soil Characteristics

The fine surface material is a powdery, graphitelike substance that seems to be dominantly
sand to silt size. When this material is in contact with rock, it makes the rock slippery. This
phenomenon was checked on a fairly smooth,
sloped rock. When the powdery material was
placed on the rocks, the boot sole slipped easily
on the rock, and the slipping was sufficient to
cause some instability of movement. Otherwise,
traction was generally good in the loose, powdery material.
Unexpected differences in the consistency and
softness of this top layer were noticed at locations having minor changes in surface topography. These differences were manifested in significantly different footprint depths. These depth
differences indicated that there may be different
depths of surface material covering the more
resistive subsurface, particularly on the rims of
small craters.
When the surface near the LM was viewed
following touchdown, the topography that had
been observed prior to touchdown had changed
little. Although there was no crater, the lunar
surface directly under the engine bell had a
singed and baked appearance. The baking appeared to have made the surface material more
cohesive and perhaps made it flow together to
give a strong streaked pattern radiating from
below the bell. However, the impact of small
objects thrown on this material indicated that
the material was about as loosely bound as the
material away from the LM. The streaks, or ray
texture, when viewed down Sun were much
darker than the rest of the surface. Any erosion
that existed in this area was clearly radially outward. However, this erosion was not obvious to
us beyond the limits of the landing gear. No
redeposition of material was observed away
from the LM except possibly for the powder

37

observed in the cavities of some rock fragments
close to the spacecraft. Also, the soil under the
LR/I showed no evidence of disruptive outgassing of injected engine gases.
Visual examination of the LM and of the lunar
surface beneath the Lh4 showed no effects from
fluids that had vented from the LM. A slight
amount of vapor that may have escaped from a
boiler was observed at the top of the LM.
Surface penetrability decreases quickly within
the first few inches of the surface. The first evidence of this decrease was the 2- to 3-in. penetration of the LM footpads and the rather shallow trenching by the landing probes. When
specifically probed more than 4 or 5 in., the surface was found to be quite firm. This firmness
was clearly evident during deployment of the
staffs of the U.S. flag and the Solar Wind Composition Experiment. Probing of the initial 4 or
5 in. of the surface was relatively easy; however,
6 to S in. was as far as the flagstaff would penetrate the surface. The surface penetration by the
core tubes was no greater than S or 9 in., even
when the sampler extension was hammered hard
enough to be significantly dented. In contrast,
the soil offered very little lateral support to the
staffs and core tubes when they were left to
stand by themselves. There were no rocks under
the core tubes during the driving operations.
The material at the bottom of the core sample
appeared to be darker than the surface material.
and this material packed in the tube and adhered to the sides of the tube in the same manner as wet sand or silt.
When kicked or scuffed, lunar material moved
away radially. The ballistic trajectory patterns
of this kicked material depended upon the angle
of impact of the boot. Most of the particles had
the same angle of departure and velocity so that
a large proportion of the particles impacted the
same distance from their source. I11 the lunar
environment, a cloud of kicked material did not
settle slowly as would have occurred if material
were kicked on Earth. The material disturbed
by our walking or kicking was generally dark
when contrasted with undisturbed material
nearby.
Summarizing the vertical soil profile of lunar
materials as we observed it, the following zones
can be defined in order of increasing depth:

38

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

( 1 ) A very thin (less than one-eighth in.)
light-gray to tannish-gray dusty zone
( 2 ) A thin (about one-fourth in.) dark-gray
caked zone that will crack 5 to 6 in. away from
where force is applied
( 3 ) A 2- to 6-in.-thick zone of soft, dark-gray
to cocoa-gray, slightly cohesive sandy-to-silty
material that will hold slopes of probably 170'
( 4 ) A zone that is gradational with zone 3
and is similar to zone 3 except for a marked
increase in firmness and resistance to penetration
Zone 3 is the only zone with a thickness that
clearly varies with topography, being thickest
on the rims of small craters. There was, however, no noticeable thickening of zone 3 on the
rim of the large crater just east of the LM. The
distribution of rock fragments was not noticeably different among the soil zones, except for
an apparently lower concentration in zones 1 to
3 on the rims of the small craters.
Sampling Operations
Contingency Sample

The contingency sample was obtained by
taking several partial scoops of soil from zones
1, 2, and 3 in the area in front of quad IV of
the LM. There was noticeable difficulty in
scooping deeper than about 2 or 3 in. because
of an increase in soil firmness. An effort was
made to include several small rock fragments in
the sample. All the sample was taken from an
area that did not appear to have been disturbed
by the descent engine gases.
Bulk Sample

The bulk sample was obtained in front of
quad IV and the + Y landing gear of the LM.
This sample consists largely of scoops of soil
from zones 1, 2, and 3 to a depth of about 3 in.
and of randomly selected rock fragments from
the surface. In some instances it was not possible to scoop more than 1 or 2 in. below the
surface; however, there appeared to be no hard
layer at that depth.
Documented Sample

The documented sample was taken very rapidly, and no attempt was made to actually docu-

ment the samples by voice or photography.
However, an effort was made to select as wide
a variety of samples as possible. The first few
rocks were collected from the surface and subsurface 15 to 20 ft north of the LM. In an
attempt to avoid the effects of the descent
engine gases, the rest of the rocks were collected in the area between the LM and the
double elongate crater to the southwest of the
LM and in the area between the LM and the
Early Apollo Scientific Experiments Package
site to the south of the LM.
Core-Tube Sampler

The core-tube samples were taken approximately 10 ft apart about 20 ft northwest of the
LM. This area had been generally disturbed by
previous operations; however, the samples were
not taken directly in footprints.
Photographic Operations

The 70-mm Hasselblad photographs generally
were taken using the recommended exposure
settings. In some instances on the lunar surface,
however, we interpolated between these settings. When exposure conditions were marginal
or when a large amount of film remained, we
used a range of exposures. Focus settings were
selected to give as good a focus as possible at
the object of interest, rather than using the preselected focus detents.
Physiological Effects

Distances on the lunar surface are deceiving.
A large boulder field located north of the LM
did not appear to be too far away when viewed
from the LM cockpit. However, on the surface
we did not come close to this field, although we
traversed about 100 ft toward it. The flag, the
television camera, and the experiments, although
deployed a reasonable distance away from the
LM and deployed according to plan, appeared
to be immediately outside the window when
viewed from the LM cockpit. Because distance
judgment is related to the accuracy of size estimation, it is evident that these skills may require
refinement in the lunar environment.
The lunar gravity field also has differing
effects on Earth-learn,ed skills. Although the

CREW OBSERVATIONS

gravitational pull on the Moon is known to be
one-sixth of the gravitational pull on the Earth,
objects seem to weigh approximately one-tenth
of their Earth weight. The mass of an object
makes the object easy to handle in the reduced
lunar atmosphere and gravitational field. Once
moving, objects continue moving, although their
movements appear to be significantly slower in
the lunar environment. However, personal maneuvering on the lunar surface gives the impression that the gravitational pull is similar to
Earth gravity; that is, suited mobility on the
Moon does not seem to be much different from
unsuited mobility on the Earth.
Finally, the absence of any natural vertical
features, coupled with the poor definition of the
horizon and the weak gravity indication at the
feet of an observer, causes difficulty in identification of level areas when looking down at the
surface. The ability to discern level areas is
further complicated by the fact that, when a
lunar observer is wearing a spacesuit, the center
of mass of the lunar observer is higher and farther back than the normal center of mass of an
observer on Earth.
Walking in the up-Sun direction posed no
problem, although the light was very bright

39

with the Sun shining directly into the visor.
While walking in the down-Sun direction, most
objects were visible, but the contrast was
washed out. Varying shapes, sizes, and glints
were more easily identified in the cross-Sun
directions.
Although Tranquility Base is a relatively
smooth area, the operation of a mobile vehicle
in this area would require careful planning.
Steep slopes, deep holes, and ridges cover the
surface. Special consideration must be given to
these characteristics when designing a mobile
vehicle that will operate in such an environment.

Solar Corona Observations
During translunar flight, we observed that the
solar corona had no noticeable structure or
variation in color. The change in illuminosity
with radius was similar to that of zodiacal light,
especially of long-time-exposure photographs of
zodiacal light. Because illuminosity decreased
evenly with radius, any estimate of the coronal
diameter would depend on how closely one were
looking at the illumination; if one were looking
very closely, the corona might have a diameter
of two, or maybe three, lunar diameters.

3. Geologic Setting of the Lunar Samples Returned
by the Apollo 11 Mission
E. M. Shoemaker, N. G. Bailey, R. M. Batson, D. H.. Dahlem, T. H. Foss, M. J. Grolier,
E. N . Goddard, M. H. Hait, H. E. Holt, K. B. Larson, I. J. Rennilson, G. G. Schaber,
D. L. Schleiche~;H. H. Schmitt, R. L. Sutton, G. A. Swann, A. C. Waters, and M. N. West

The most urgent tasks of the Apollo Lunar
Geology Experiment team have been to obtain
information needed for planning the analysis
program for the returned lunar samples and to
make these data available to other investigators
who will study the samples. Consequently, the
entire initial effort of the team has been devoted
to these tasks. Unusual difficulties have been
encountered in this work because of the circumstances of the Apollo 1 mission. For example,
1
time was not available for the astronauts to

document, by planned procedures, the localities
from which specimens were collected. A critical
effort of the experiment team, therefore, has
been an attempt to discover the specimen localities by using photographs taken for other purposes. At the time this report was prepared, the
attempt had been only modestly successful.
In general, because of the time limitations
during the extravehicular activity ( EVA),
photographs taken on the lunar surface are not
well suited for photogrammetri.: analysis. Data

FIGURE -Index map of the eastern part of the lunar equatorial belt showing the maria
3-1.
distribution and the location of the Apollo 11 LM and Surveyor 5 landing sites
and the Ranger 8 impact crater.

42

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

concerning the positions, sizes, and orientation
of features on the lunar surface around the lunar
module (LM) are being extracted from the
photographs by methods that are necessarily
laborious. With further work, it is expected that
a fairly detailed picture of the topography and
geology of the landing site will be recovered and
that the original positions on the lunar surface
of additional returned specimens will be located. When this has been accomplished, a full
interpretive report on the geology will be prepared.
Regional Geologic Setting

The Apollo 1 LM landed approximately
1
20 km south-southwest of the crater Sabine D in
the southwestern part of Mare Tranquillitatis
(fig. 3-1). The landing site is 41.5 km northnortheast of the western promontory of the Kant
Plateau (ref. 3-l), which is the nearest highland
region. The Surveyor 5 spacecraft is approximately 25 km north-northwest of the Apollo 11
landing site, and the impact crater formed by
Ranger 8 is 68 km northeast of the landing site.
Mare Tranquillitatis is a "blue" mare (refs.
3-2 and 3-3) of irregular form. The following
characteristics suggest that the mare material is
relatively thin:
( 1 ) An unusual ridge ring named Lamont,
which occurs in the southwest part of the mare,
may be localized over the shallowly buried rim
of a pre-mare crater.
( 2 ) No large positive gravity anomaly, such
as those occurring over the deep mare-filled circular basins, is associated with Mare TranquilBtatis (ref. 3-4).
The southern part of Mare Tranquillitatis is
crossed by relatively faint, but distinct, rays
trending north-northwest (fig. 3-2) and by
prominent secondary craters that are associated
with the crater Theophilus, which is located
320 km southeast of the LM landing site.
Approximately 15 km west of the landing site is
a fairly prominent ray that trends north-northeast. The crater with which this ray is associated
is not definitely known; the ray may be related
to the crater Alfraganus, 160 km southwest of
the landing site, or to Tycho, approximately 1500
km southwest of the landing site. Neither the
ray that trends north-northeast nor any of the

rays that trend north-northwest cross the landing
site; these rays are sufficiently close, however,
so that material from Theophilus, Alfraganus, or
Tycho is possibly found in the vicinity of the
LM landing site. Other distant craters may also
be the source of fragments which lie near the
LM landing site. In particular, the crater Moltke,
which is 40 km southeast of the landing site,
may be a source of fragments. Potential distant
sources of fragments are in the highlands and
in the maria.
On the basis of albedo and crater density,
three geologic units can be distinguished in the
mare material in the vicinity of the landing site.
The LM landed on the most densely cratered
unit of these three geologic units. These units
may correspond to lava flows of different ages;
if this is true, the unit at the landing site is probably the oldest.
A hill of terra material, located 52 km eastsoutheast of the landing site, protrudes above
the mare surface. The occurrence of this hill
suggests that the mare material in this region
is very thin, perhaps no more than a few hundred meters thick. Craters, such as Sabine D and
Sabine E (fig. 3-2), with a diameter greater
than 1 km, may have been excavated partly in
pre-mare rocks; and pre-mare rock fragments
that have been ejected from these craters may
occur in the vicinity of the LM landing site.
Geology of the Apollo 1 1

L Landing Site
M

The LM landed approximately 400 m west of
a sharp-rimmed ray crater, approximately 180 m
in diameter and 30 m deep (fig. 3-3), which had
been informally named West Crater. West
Crater is surrounded by a blocky ejecta apron
that extends almost symmetrically outward approximately 250 m from the rim crest. Blocks
as large ,as 5 m wide occur on the rim and in
the interior of the crater. Rays of blocky ejecta
with many fragments from % to 2 m in width
extend beyond the ejecta apron west of the
landing point (fig. 3-4). The LM landed in a
region between these rays that is relatively free
of extremely coarse blocks.
At the landing site, the lunar surface consists
of unsorted fragmental debris, which ranges in
size from particles that are too fine to be re-

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

Explanation

mmrn

Slope material Ray material

~~~
Materials of
ray craters

n-Contact, dashed where approximate

Dark halo

Copernican
System
Mare ridge

Satellitic crater material

m
J

pT q
- q

Materials of
rayless craters

43

,

Eratosthenian
System

Crater materials

----

Lineament

(
Fault,

-

a

Procellarum
lmbrian System

0

Cayley Formation

bar, and ball on downthrown side;
hachured where younger u n i t deposited
against fault
Irregular depression

10

20

30

40

~-z'-pq
Materials of Kant Plateau

FIGURE - Regional geologic map of the region around the LM landing site.
3-2.

50

44

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

FIGURE - Mosaic of Lunar Orbiter 5 photographs showing the location of the LM landing
3-3.
site and of West Crater.

solved by the naked eye to blocks 0.8 m wide.
This fragmental debris forms a layer, the lunar
regolith, which is porous and weakly coherent
at the surface. The regolith grades downward
into similar, but more densely packed, material.
The bulk of the regolith consists of fine particles, but many rock fragments were encountered on the surface and in the subsurface.
The surface of the regolith is pockmarked
with small craters ranging in diameter from only
a few centimeters to several tens of meters.
Immediately southwest of the LM landing site
is a double crater (15 m long, 8 m wide, and
1m deep) with a subdued raised rim (fig. 3 5 ) .
Approximately 60 m east of the LM landing site
is a steep-walled, but shallow, crater with a
raised rim. This crater, which is 33 m in diameter and 4 m deep, was visited by Astronaut

Neil A. Armstrong near the end of the EVA
(figs. 3-3 and 3-6).
Many of the small craters have low, but distinct, raised rims; some rims are sharply formed,
but most rims are subdued. Other craters are
shallow and rimless, or nearly rimless. The small
rimless craters are commonly merged together
to form irregular shallow depressions. Both the
craters and the irregular depressions are distributed without apparent alinement or pattern.
Small craters are scattered irregularly on the
rims, walls, and floors of larger craters (fig.
3-5).
All the craters in the immediate vicinity of
the LM landing site have rims, walls, and floors
composed of fine-grained material. Scattered,
coarser fragments occur in about the same
abundance in these craters as occur on the inter-

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

FIGURE3-4. - Hasselblad photograph AS11-37-5468 taken from the LM window and showing
a ray of coarse blocks north of the LM landing site.

FIGURE3-5. -Mosaic of Hasselblad photographs taken from the LM window showing the
double crater located southwest of the LM landing site.

FIGURE
3-6. - Mosaic of Hasselblad photographs showing the 33-m-diameter crater east of the
LM landing site.

45

46

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

crater areas. These craters are approximately
1 m or less in depth; they have evidently been
excavated entirely in the regolith.
In the 33-m-diameter crater east of the LM
landing site, the crater walls and rim have the
same texture as the regolith has elsewhere; however, a pile of blocks occurs on the floor of the
crater (Gg. 3-6). The crater floor probably lies
close to the base of the regolith. Several craters
of about the same size as the 33-m-diameter
crater (with steep walls and shallow, flat floors
or floors with central humps) occur in the region
around the landing site (fig. 3-3). Judging from
the depths of these craters, the thickness of the
regolith is estimated to range from 3 to 6 m.
An unexpected discovery made by Astronaut

Armstrong was the presence of blebs of material
with specular surfaces. These blebs of material
partially covered 2- to 10-cm-diameter areas in
the bottom of six or eight 1-m-diameter raisedrim craters. Astronaut Armstrong observed these
apparently glassy blebs, which resembled drops
of solder (fig. 3-7), only in craters. The form of
the blebs suggests they had been formed by the
splashing of molten material traveling at low
velocity. The distribution of the blebs suggests
that they are natural features on the lunar surface; however, the possibility exists that the
blebs are artifacts that were produced by the
landing of the Lhil.
In addition to craters, the surface of the regolith is marked by small, shallow troughs (fig.

FIGURE - Closeup stereophotograph ASll-45-6704A showing glassy blebs on the lunar
3-7.
surface.

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

3-11). By using photographs taken 19 m southeast and 12 m north of the center of the LM
landing site, a preliminary study was made of
the troughs. Most of the troughs are a fraction
of a centimeter to a centimeter deep, approximately K to 3 cm wide, and 3 to 50 cm long;
three of these troughs that were observed are
2 to 3 m long. The troughs are located 3 to 5 cm
apart in areas in which they are prominent. One
set of troughs trends northwest; another set
(which is comparable to the northwest-trending
troughs in abundance, but are more dispersed in
orientation) trends northeast to north-northeast.
A few troughs were observed that trend in
other directions. Troughs of similar appearance
were noted in many other photographs, but the
orientations of these other troughs have not yet
been determined.
Coarse fragments are scattered in the vicinity

Surveyor 1
S u r v e y o r 3 ----Surveyor 5
S u r v e y o r 6 --Surveyor 7 ---Apollo 11
-----

--------

I

mm

I

cm
Particle size

l

m

l

FIGURE3-9. - Cumulative size-frequency distribution of
rock fragments coarser than 3.2 cm at the LM landing
site, compared with size and frequency of rock fragments at Surveyor landing sites.

Contour interval: 5 cm

FIGURE 3-8. - Topographic map of part of the lunar
surface visible from both windows of the LM showing the distribution of rock fragments.

of the LM landing site in approximately the
same or somewhat greater abundance than is
found at the Surveyor 1 landing site (figs. 3-8
to 3-10) (ref. 3-5). These coarse fragments are
distinctly more abundant in these two sites than
they are at other Surveyor landing sites on the
maria, including the Surveyor 5 landing site,
which is northwest of the LM landing site. Similar to the Apollo 1 LM, Surveyor 1landed near
1
a fresh blocky rim crater but beyond the apron
of coarse blocky ejecta. It may be inferred that
many rock fragments in the immediate vicinity

48

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE - Hasselblad photograph ASll40-5851 of the region south of the LM landing
3-10.
site from which selected rocks were collected by Astronaut Armstrong.

FIGURE
3-11, - Hasselblad photograph ASll-40-5913
showing part of the lunar surface marked by linear
troughs.

+

of the spacecraft, at both the Surveyor 1 and the
Apollo 1 landing sites, were derived from the
1
nearby blocky rim crater. Fragments derived
from West Crater may have come from depths
as great as 30 m beneath the mare surface.
The fine-grained matrix of the regolith consists chiefly of microscopic particles. The regolith is weak and easily trenched to depths of
several centimeters. Surface material was easily
dislodged when kicked. When the flagpole for
the U.S. flag and the core tubes were pressed
into the surface, they penetrated with ease to
a depth of 10 to 12 cm. At that depth, the

49

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

regolith was not sufficiently strong, however, to
hold the core tubes upright; a hammer was
needed to drive them to depths of 15 to 20 cm.
At several places, rocks were encountered in the
subsurface by the tubes, rods, and scoop that
were pressed into the subsurface.
The astronauts' boots left prints approximately
3 mm to 3 cm deep in the fine-grained regolith
material (fig. 3-12). Smooth molds of the boot
treads were preserved in the bootprints, and
angles of 70° were maintained in the walls of
the bootprints. The fine-grained surficial material
tended to break into slabs, cracking as far as
12 to 15 cm from the edges of the footprints.
The finest fraction of the regolith adhered
weakly to boots, gloves, spacesuits, handtools,
and rocks on the lunar surface. On repeated contact, the coating on the boots thickened until

boot color was completely obscured. When the
fine particles of the regolith were brushed off,
a stain was left on the spacesuits.
In places where fine-grained material was
kicked by the astronauts, the freshly exposed
material was conspicuously darker than the undisturbed surface. As at the Surveyor landing
sites, the subsurface material probably lies at
depths no greater than a millimeter from the
surface. The existence of a thin surface layer of
lighter colored material at widely scattered
localities indicates that some widespread process
of surface-material alteration is taking place on
the Moon.
Fillets of fine-grained material are banked
against the sides of most rock fragments. The
fillets were observed at least as far as 70 m from
the LM, and most of the fillets are almost certainly natural features of the surface. On sloping
surfaces, Astronaut Armstrong observed that the
fillets were larger on the uphill sides of rocks
than on the downhill sides of rocks. The sides
of rocks are ballistic traps, and the fillets have
probably been formed by the trapping of lowvelocity secondary particles. Asymmetric development of fillets around rocks on slopes may be
partly caused by preferential downhill transport
of material by ballistic processes and partly
caused by downhill creep or flow of the finegrained material.
Disturbances of the Lunar Surface Produced
by Landing of the

FIGURE 3-12. - Hasselblad photograph ASll-40-5877
showing an astronaut's bootprint in the lunar surface.

L
M

During the landing of the LM, the lunar surface was moderately disturbed by the LM descent-propulsion-system engine blast and by
contact of the landing gear with the surface.
After the LM had descended to within 30 m of
the surface, a sheet of fine dust was observed to
move radially away from the center of the
rocket plume. Particles composing this sheet, in
general, traveled close to the surface and were
deflected by the larger rocks.
The descent propulsion system continued to
fire a short time after landing; thus, the area
beneath the rocket engine is darkened and has a
strongly swept appearance. No detectable crater
was formed beneath the rocket engine, but a
thin, coherent crust appears to have developed.

50

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGTJRE
3-13. - Hasselblad photograph ASll-40-5921
showing the lunar surface beneath the LM descent
propulsion system.

FIGURE 3-14. - Hasselblad photograph ASll-40-5918

The crust is locally offset or broken (fig. 3-13).
The upper surface of the crust is marked by a
large number of fine grooves and ridges that
are alined radially with respect to a surface
point lying approximately beneath the center of
the rocket engine. The radial pattern of grooves
and ridges extends at least several meters past
the +Y footpad to the north of the LM (fig.
3-14), in the direction from which the LM
approached immediately prior to landing. In
other directions, the swept ground does not
appear to extend much past the footpads.
Probes that extended below the footpads dug
only a short distance into the surface and were
dragged to the south during the landing. The
footpads skidded along the surface (fig. 3-14)
and dug in no more than a few centimeters at
the leading edge. A small mound of fine-grained
material piled up at the leading edge of each
footpad.

view and analysis of the lunar television pictures, from analysis of the 16-mm pictures taken
with a time-sequence camera mounted in the
LM cockpit, and from detailed study of photographs taken with Hasselblad cameras before,
during, and after the EVA.
The camera stations for Hasselblad survey
panoramas taken on the EVA were located by
photographic triangulation from mosaics. Horizontal angles between the LM footpads were
measured on the photographs as a function of
the known field of view, and the angles were
drawn on tracing paper. The paper was then
manipulated over a scale drawing of the LM
until the lines intersected the appropriate pads
at the proper place. Once the panorama locations had been determined, azimuths were measured from two or more panoramas to conspicuous features on the surface, and the positions of
the features were plotted by triangulation to
produce the map of figure 3-15. Individual photographs were located, and their orientations
were measured by similar methods, using for
control both the LM footpads and other features
on the lunar surface that had been located by
triangulation from the panoramas.

Surface Traverse and Sampling Activities
of the Astronauts

The surface traverse and sampling activities
of the astronauts have been reconstructed from
clues provided by the voice transcript, from re-

showing the swept ground adjacent to the +Y footpad of the LM.

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES
\

Inset map showing position of Panorama station 5

I

'. ;

I

shadow outline-----

Explanation

-

%
*/

9y
q
,

:+

'

@

Centerline of pictures tilted less
than 10" below horizontal
Pictures tilted 10" to 25" below
horizontal

Pictures tilted more than 25" or
pictures containing near-field
geologic information only
- . . . . . Centerline of television panorama
-....picture

Jettison bag
Rocks

P
a-

---

LRRR Laser Ranging Retroreflector

Very subdued crater

PSEP

Passive Seismic Experiment Package

Subdued cratek

SWC

Solar-Wind Composition

-.-

Relatively sharp crater

-T I
I T-

Shallow depression

,

TV

Television camera

ALSCC Apollo Lunar Surface Closeup Camera

FIGURE
3-15. - Preliminary map of EVA photographs and television pictures taken at

the

landing site.

Because the graphical method by which these
data have been obtained is fairly crude, azimuths shown for individual frames may have
errors of 3 O or more. Positions of most of the
camera stations are probably within a 1.5-m
circle centered at the point shown. The determinations are sufficiently accurate, however, to
provide a useful control net for an overall view

of the astronauts' traverse and a starting point
for more rigorous analytical photogrammetric
measurements.
A traverse map has been prepared (fig. 3-16),
using for control the object locations obtained
by graphic solution. The plot of the surface traverse of the crew was obtained primarily from

APOLLO I1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE
3-16. - Preliminary traverse map of the landing site.

study of the Hasselblad photographs. Regions
disturbed by walking are easily detected because of their lower albedo. A rough estimate of
the minimum total distance traveled by Astro-

nauts Armstrong and Aldrin combined is 750 to
1000 m. The most distant single traverse was
made by Astronaut Armstrong to the 33-mdiameter crater east of the LM.

GEOLOGIC SETTING O F LUNAR SAMPLES

FIGURE3-17. - Enlargement of 16-mm sequence-camera photographs (magazine K ) showing
Astronaut Armstrong immediately prior to and immediately after scooping up
two rock samples in the first of two contingency sample scoops. ( a ) Immediately prior to scooping. The larger rock ( 6 cm in width) has been identified
as LRL specimen 10022 (fig. 3-23). ( b ) Immediately after scooping. Note the
scoop mark where the two rocks had been lying on the lunar surface.

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

FIGURE
3-18. - Enlargement of 16-mm sequence-camera photographs (magazine K ) showing
Astronaut Armstrong immediately prior to and immediately after taking the
second contingency sample scoop. (a) Immediately prior to second scooping.
Note LRL specimen 10023 below the scoop. ( b ) Immediately after second
scooping. Note LRL specimen 10023 is missing, and a shallow scoop mark is
visible.

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

Sampling Log
Confingency Sample

The contingency sample was collected in full
view of the sequence camera immediately northwest of the LM, and the collection time was
approximately 3 min and 35 sec. The sample
bag was filled with two scoops of sample having
a total weight of approximately 1.4 kg. From
study of the sequence film data (figs. 3-17 and
3-18), the regions that were scooped have been
accurately located on a pre-EVA LM window
photograph. Both scoops included small surface
rock fragments that were visible from the LM
windows prior to sampling (fig. 3-19).
Bulk Sample

Astronaut Armstrong required 14 min to collect approximately 16 kg of bulk sample, from
the beginning of sampling to sealing of the
Sample Return Container (SRC). Of that time,
5 min were spent in sealing the SRC. Astronaut

55

Armstrong went out of the television field of
view three times during bulk sampling; he traversed twice to the left of the field of view for
a total of 1 min and 1 sec and once to the
1
right of the field of view for 35 sec. At least 17
or 18 scoop motions were made in full view of
the television camera, and at least five scoop
motions were made within the field of view of
the sequence camera (fig. 3-20). The total number of scoops was 22 or 23. Nine trips back to
the Modularized Equipment Stowage Assembly
(MESA) were made to empty the scoop. An
average of 2;: scoop motions was required to fill
the scoop.
Documenfed Samples

A total of 5 min and 50 sec was spent by
Astronaut Aldrin in obtaining the two core-tube
samples, both of which were taken in the vicinity
of the Solar Wind Composition Experiment. The
driving of the first core was documented by the
television camera and by two individual Hasselblad photographs. The second core-tube location

FIGURE
3-19. - Hasselblad photograph AS11-39-5777 taken from the L M window showing rocks
A, B, C, and D, which were collected in the contingency sample scoops.

56

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

(in the vicinity of the Solar Wind Composition
Experiment) was confirmed only by Astronaut
Aldrin's verbal statement to that effect (groundelapsed time 04: 15:19:19).
Only 3 min and 35 sec (the same time as for
the contingency sampling) was available for collection of approximately 20 selected, but unphotographed, grab samples (approximately 7
kg) by Astronaut Armstrong in the final minutes of the EVA. Collection of these specimens
was made a distance up to 10 to 15 m away
from the LM in the region south of the + Z
strut near the east rim of the large double crater
(fig. 3-16). Astronaut Armstrong was outside
the television field of view (to the west) 25 percent of the time during this activity.
Location of Orientation of Rock Specimens

A
search has been made for indim
vidual rock fragments collected in the contingency, bulk, and documented samples. Two

rocks (Lunar Receiving Laboratory ( LRL )
specimens 10022 and 10023) in the contingency
sample and one large rock in the bulk sample
(LRL specimen 10046) have so far been located and oriented. Two other rocks in the contingency sample (LRL specimens 10028 and
10032) have been tentatively identified. Many
other rocks have been determined to be missing

FIGURE
3-20. - Hasselblad photograph

ASll-39-5802
shows scoop sites and scoop movements (indicated by
arrows) of five of the approximately 22 bulk sample
scoops, as determined from the sequence-camera photographs. Numbers in parentheses indicate the nine
trips that were made taking the samples back to the
MESA area of the LM to empty the scoop. Numbers
without parentheses represent the order in which
scoops were taken in the view of only the sequence
camera. Most of the trenches left by scooping were
destroyed later. Scoops 2, 3, and 5 are within the
view of the camera, and the trenches made by these
scoops are still visible. Rocks were sampled in scoops
4 and 5.

J.

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

and possibly sampled; but they are not yet correlated with specimens retuned to the LRL.
Hasselblad photographs taken from the LM
windows before and after EVA, EVA sequence
camera photographs, and the first panorama
taken with a Hasselblad camera during the EVA
have been used to locate scoop sites and rock
fragments for both the contingency and the bulk
samples. The panorama taken by Astronaut
Armstrong soon after he stepped onto the lunar
surface provided a near 360' view of the undisturbed surface. This surface perspective, complemented by Hasselblad photographs taken
from the LM window before EVA, provided the
information used for identification of individual
rocks.
Contingency Sample

Both contingency sample scoops were taken
within view of the sequence camera, and the
lunar surface regions scooped were located on
pre-EVA Ilasselblad photograph AS11-39-5774
by reference to small craters and rocks in the
vicinity. (Hasselblad photograph numbers refer
to photographs on file with the NASA Manned
Spacecraft Center Photographic Laboratory.)
The locations of two exposed rocks sampled
during scoop 1 and another exposed rock sampled during scoop 2 were verified by photographs showing their presence before the scoop
motion and their absence afterward (figs. 3-17
and 3-18). A fourth exposed rock, too small to
be resolved on the 16-mm sequence-camera
film, has been tentatively identified in the LM
window Hasselblad photographs as having been
collected in scoop 2. Distinct scoop marks were
visible at these locations immediately after sampling, but were destroyed by later EVA activities in the area. Figure 3-19 shows the four exposed rocks obtained during contingency sampling, as viewed from the LM window. Figure
3-21 and figure 3-22, which were taken as part of
the first panorama, also show the four indicated
contingency rocks.
The next step in identification of the contingency rock samples was to obtain an approximate size of each specimen on the lunar surface
by comparison with bootprints in close proximity. The medium lunar surface boot is 35.5 cm
long and 16.0 cm wide at its widest point. In

57

FIG^ 3-21. - Enlargement from Hasselblad photograph

ASll-40-5837 showing rocks A and B, which were
sampled in the first contingency sample scoop. Rock A
has tentatively been identified as LRL specimen
10022. ( Compare with fig. 3-33. ) Rock B has not been
satisfactorily identified, but may be LRL specimen
10028.

figure 3-19, rock A is approximately 6 cm, rock
B is approximately 2 cm, and rock C is approximately 5.5 cm, each in its longest exposed dimension.
Photographs taken in the LRL show that four
fragments coarser than 4 cm were recovered
from the contingency sample. The largest fragment (LRL specimen 10021) is approximately 9
cm long, and two fragments (LRL specimens
10022 and 10023) are 6 to 6% cm long. One
fragment (LRL specimen 10024) is 5 cm long.
Figure 3-19 shows that rock A is an angular
fragment with a characteristic pointed end. LRL
specimen 10022 is a vesicular, crystalline rock
with the proper shape and size to match rock A.
The two remaining rocks that are at least 6 cm
long do not have a pointed end of the proper
shape. A preliminary orientation of LRL specimen 10022 is shown in figure 3-23.
Rock B (fig. 3-19) is approximately 2 cm in
its largest dimension and has a distinct groove
in the upper surface that is visible in photographs taken from the LM window. This rock
has been tentatively correlated with LRL specimen 10028, which measures 2.5 by 2 by 1 cm
and is the eighth largest fragment in the contingency sample.
Rock C (figs. 3-19 and 3-22), which was col-

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

58

FIGURE - Enlargement from Hasselblad photograph
3-22
ASll-40-5857 showing the rocks that were sampled
in the second contingency sample scoop. The rocks
have been tentatively identified as LRL specimens
10023 and 10032.

Measurement of the rock from the Hasselblad
photographs indicates that the exposed part is
approximately 5 cm long. The LRL specimens
10021 and 10023 were studied as possible
matches because they were the only two remaining rocks in the contingency sample that were
large enough. The LRL specimen 10021 was rejected because it does not contain a sufficiently
deep depression of the proper size (1.2 cm) to
match that observed on the sampled rock. The
LRL specimen 10023, however, contains a deep
pit of the appropriate size. An approximate orientation of LRL specimen 10023 with respect to
its position on the lunar surface is shown in
figure 3-24.
Less than 5 em from rock C is a small rock
1% wide (rock D on figs. 3-19 and 3-22) that
cm
was almost certainly collected in the second contingency sample scoop but is too small to be
.
clearly resolved in the 16-mm sequence-camera
photographs. On the basis of size and shape,
this rock has been tentatively correlated with
LRL specimen 10032, which is the 12th largest
fragment in the contingency sample.
Bulk Sample

-

0

1
2
cm
Approximate scale

FIGURE
3-23. -Approximate orientation of LRL specimen 10022 in lunar coordinates.

lected in the second contingency sample scoop,
has a characteristic deep depression 1.2 to 1.5
cm in diameter on its exposed face. This depression facilitates identification and orientation.

During collection of the bulk sample, five
separate scoop marks were made within view of
the EVA sequence camera. The location of these
marks on the lunar surface has been verified (fig.
3-20). At least two small rocks, 1 to 2 cm wide,
were included in scoops 4 and 5 (fig. 3-20) but
are too poorly resolved to be identified in the
photographs. Larger rocks collected in the bulk
sample include three or four rocks approximately 10 cm wide, five rocks approximately
5 cm wide, and 15 or more rocks that range
from 1 to 5 cm wide. Thus far, only one rock
10 cm wide has been located and oriented.
A subrounded, equidimensional rock was determined to be missing from a point approximately 4 m from the +Z footpad at a 250°
azimuth (fig. 3-25). The rock was located by
comparison of pre-EVA and post-EVA LM window photographs. (For an example, see fig.
3-26.) A study of figure 3-27, taken after bulk
sampling, verified that the rock had been removed by the bulk sampling scoop. A scoop
mark is clearly visible in figure 3-27 in the position that the rock had occupied. Measurement

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

0

1

cm
Approximate scale

2

u

0

1

2

cm
Approximate scale

FIGURE
3-24. -Orientation diagram of LRL specimen 10023. ( a ) The spccimen is shown as
viewed from the southeast. The rounded surface and the approximate intersection of the rock surface with the lunar surface is shown. Orientation of the
specimen in lunar coordinates is shown. At top is LRL photograph S-69-45394.
( b ) This diagram shows the flat, northwest face of the sample and the approximate intersection of the rock surface with the lunar surface. Orientation of the
specimen in lunar coordinates is shown. At top is LRL photograph S-69-45392.

of the specimen by comparison with bootprints
shows that it is 10 cm wide. The LRL photographs were searched for the larger rocks collected in the bulk sample. The northeast face of
the rock as seen in photograph ASll-40-5853
(fig. 3-28) was readily identified in the LRL
photograph S-69-45610 of LRL specimen 10046
(fig. 3-28).
Documented Sample

Several rocks in the documented sampling
area south of the + Z footpad have been found
to be missing, moved, stepped on, or possibly
sampled. As yet, no definite correlations between

missing rocks and LRL specimens have been
made, but it is possible that several larger specimens will be found after closer study.
The pre-EVA and post-EVA LM window
photographs show the southeastern part of the
sampling area (figs. 3-29 and 3-30). Missing
rocks, labeled E, F, and G in figure 3-29, are
clearly visible in photograph ASll40-5945
taken during the EVA (fig. 3-31). Rock E appears to have been stepped on and broken, while
rocks F and G have definitely been removed
from their original position. Several small elongate depressions near rocks F and C may be
seen in the post-EVA photograph (fig. 3-30).

60

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE 3-25. - Enlargement from Hasselblad photograph ASll-40-5853 showing undisturbed rocks and
LRL specimen 10046.
C-

FIGURE 3-26. - Enlargement from Hasselblad photograph ASll-37-5502 showing the disturbed rocks and
changes that occurred during EVA.
J,

GEOLOGIC SETTING O F LUNAR SAMPLES

I.
These depressions may have been formed by the
dragging of the specimens across the surface as
they were being collected. Rock F, which is approximately 20 cm across, apparently was not
returned in the documented sample container,
and it is suspected that this rock corresponds to
a large fragment picked up with the sampling
tongs and then dropped by Astronaut Armstrong
in this vicinity during documented sampling.'
With more detailed study, there is a good possibility that rock G can be correlated with an LRL
specimen.
Rock Fragments
Individual specimens of returned rock have
been studied by the Lunar Geology Experiment
Personal communication from Astronaut Armstrong,
Aug. 27, 1969.

FIGURE
3-27. - Hasselblad photograph ASll-40-5887,
which was taken from the second panorama-photograph station, showing the region from which LRL
specimen 10046 was taken.

team by comparing Hasselblad photographs of
the rocks in their original positions on the lunar
surface and photographs of the rocks taken in
the LRL. The purpose of these studies was to
determine the local geologic environment of
each specimen and the relationship of each
specimen to other rocks and materials at the
sample locality. From the field geologic relations
and the hand specimen characteristics of each
rock, an attempt has been made to extract the
data that bear on geologic processes that have

62

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

FIGURE 3-29. - Hasselblad photograph ASll-39-5147
taken from the LM window looking south. This photograph shows rocks F and G, which were probably
moved during the documented sampling period.

FIGURE 3-28. - Hasselblad photograph ASll-40-5853
and LRL photograph S-69-45610 of LRL specimen
10046 showing the lunar orientation of the specimen.

affected the specimen and to extract data on the
geologic history of the specimen.
The data presented have been derived entirely from photographs and have been obtained
independently from mineralogical and other investigations conducted in the LRL. Each returned rock specimen is considered to be a
geologic entity with a unique history, and the
specimen is investigated as a whole, as it was
collected on the Moon, rather than analyzed for
its components. Of particular interest are the
diverse surfaces of each rock, from which much
can be learned about the history of the rock
after it became a fragment in the lunar regolith.

FIGURE 3-30. - Hasselblad photograph AS11-39-5794
taken from the LM window looking south showing the
region where rocks F and G are missing.

By studying many rocks from this standpoint,
the processes may be elucidated by which the
lunar regolith and its constituent fragments were
formed.
Rock fragments at the Apollo 11 LM landing
site have a wide variety of shapes, and most of
the fragments are embedded to varying degrees

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

FIGURE
3-31. - A section of Hasselblad photograph
ASll-40-5945 showing the detail of rocks F and G.

in the fine matrix of the regolith. A majority of
the rocks are rounded to subrounded on their
upper surfaces, but angular fragments of irregular shape are also abundant. A few rocks are
rectangular slabs with a faint platy structure.
Many of the rounded rocks, when collected,
were found to be flat or of irregular angular
shape on the bottom. The exposed part of one
unusual rock, which was not collected, was described by Astronaut Armstrong as resembling
a distributor cap. When this rock was dislodged
with a kick, the sculptured "cap" was found to
be the top of a much bigger rock, the buried
part of which was larger in lateral dimensions
and angular in form.
The rocks sampled are of two basic types:
( 1 ) rocks with crystalline textures of fine- to
medium-grain size and ( 2 ) aggregates of clastic
material. The most abundant of the returned
crystalline rocks are fine-grained rocks with
vesicular or platy textures that resemble terrestrial basalts. During his traverse on the Moon,
Astronaut Armstrong called these rocks basalts
and commented on the vesicles in some of them.
One of the best examples of these basaltlike
material's is LRL specimen 10022, which is described in a later section of this report.
Subordinate in number to the basaltlike specimens are medium-grained rocks that are com-

63

posed dominantly of dark-colored minerals plus
a white mineral, which may be plagioclase.
When interpreted in terms of terrestrial rocks,
these lunar rocks resemble diabases and gabbros
(LRL specimen 10047), and feldspathic pyroxenites or peridotites (LRL specimen 10044). The
grain size of these specimens is 0.5 to 2 mm. The
texture, as revealed under stereoscopic examination of the photographs, consists of large
amounts of a euhedral dark-colored mineral,
which may be clino-pyroxene, with two cleavages at about right angles and a white cleavable
mineral, which may be plagioclase. Some rocks
contain rounded dark-colored minerals surrounded by jackets of the plagioclaselike and
pyroxenelike minerals. In LRL specimen 10044,
moreover, a stratiform banding is visible, although it is difficult to distinguish from exfoliation shells that are present in the same specimen.
These features are similar to the textures and
banding found in specimens from mafic plutonic
complexes on Earth.
Aggregates of weakly to strongly indurated
clastic materials, which are composed mostly of
rough-surfaced spheroidal to angular grains and
of clasts ranging from less than 0.1 to more than
1 cm in diameter, constitute about half of the
returned rocks. These rocks appear to have been
formed by induration of the lunar regolith material. Microbreccia is an appropriate term for
them. Typical specimens, which are described
in a following section of this report, are LRL
specimens 10023 and 10046. In two of the rocks
studied, the material appears to show stratification (at the small scale of the specimen). Many
rounded grains are too small for their true character to be identified in photographs. Some
specimens appear to be composites, perhaps
made by cementation of silt-sized particles;
others appear to be rock fragments.
Minute deep pits, ranging from a fraction of
a millimeter to approximately 2 mm in diameter,
occur on the rounded surfaces of most rocks.
These pits were observed by Astronaut Armstrong, who recognized that they had been produced on the surface of the rocks and that they
were distinguishable from vesicles. Many of
these pits are lined with glass. They are present
on two microbreccia specimens (LRL specimens
10023 and 10046) that have been identified in

64

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

photographs taken on the lunar surface and for
which the orientation of the rocks at the time
they were collected is known. The pits are found
primarily on the upper sides of these specimens;
therefore, they clearly have been produced by a
process acting on the exposed surface. The pits
do not resemble impact craters produced in the
laboratory, and their origin has not been determined.
On the rounded surfaces of some rocks, a thin,
altered rind has developed. The rind, which has
been observed on both the crystalline rocks and
the microbreccias, is characteristically approximately % to 1 mm thick. On freshly broken
faces, the rind is observed as a thin, light-colored
zone. The rind appears to be caused in part by
the shattering of mineral grains. Halos of lightcolored material, which is similar to the rind in
appearance, occur around the pits on many
specimens.
The rounding of the exposed upper surfaces
of many rocks suggests that processes of erosion
that lead to gradual rounding are taking place
on the lunar surface. Several processes may be
involved. On some rounded rock surfaces, individual clasts and grains (of which the rocks are
composed) and glassy linings of the pits on the
rock surfaces have been left .in raised relief by
general wearing away or ablation of the surface.
Rocks that exhibit this differential erosion most
prominently are microbreccia. The ablation may
be caused primarily by small-particle bombardment of the surface.
Exfoliation is another major process of rounding. The rounded forms that characterize the top
surfaces of some of the rocks collected are clearly
caused by the peeling off of closely spaced exfoliation shells. Examples of rocks rounded by
exfoliation are LRL specimens 10044 and 10047.
The curved shells passing completely around the
specimen cross the mineral banding of the stratiform rock (LRL specimen 10044) without deviation and round off the corners of the rock. The
distributor-cap form observed by Astronaut
Armstrong may have developed by exfoliation
and could have been produced by spalling of
the free surfaces of the rock as a result of one or
more energetic impacts on the top surface.
The following paragraphs provide descriptions
of LRL specimens 10022, 10023, 10032, 10046,

and 10047 and tentative identification of the
regions of the lunar surface from which the
samples were selected.

Geologic Specimen Descriptions
LRL Specimen 10022

Geologic environment. LRL specimen 10022
is the third largest fragment collected in the
contingency sample. The specimen has been
tentatively identified in photographs of the
lunar surface, pending confirmation by photogrammetric measurements. The photographic
coverage of the specimen locality is good. Photographs AS11-39-5773, AS11-39-5774, and AS1139-5777, taken from the LM windows, provide
stereoscopic coverage of the locality, but only
with a short stereographic base. Photograph
ASll-40-5857, taken from near the foot of the
spacecraft ladder (panorama l ) ,also shows the
specimen.
A region approximately 1.1 by 2.4 m surrounding LRL specimen 10022 was studied from
the photographs. The specimen is located approximately 2.5 m north of the center of the
spacecraft + Z footpad. Parts of the locality are
obscured by shadows cast by the + Y landing
struts of the spacecraft. The region studied is
relatively level, with no pronounced topographic
features (fig. 3-32). Areas enclosed by the
break-in-slope symbol in figure 3-32 are coalescing, subdued depressions. Located approximately 4 cm northeast of LRL specimen 10022
is a sharp irregular depression approximately 10
cm across, which is the only depression of this
type in the region studied. Elongate troughs
measuring a fraction of a centimeter deep, ?k to
2 cm wide, and 3 to 20 cm long are prominent
features at this locality. While most of the largest
troughs trend northeast, another set of troughs
trends northwest. Examination of photographs
taken during the EVA indicates that similar
troughs are present at least as far as 60 m from
the LM.
Approximately 280 fragments between ?
and
I
2 cm, and 11 fragments (including LRL specimen 10022) between 2 and 8 cm wide, are
scattered over the region studied. Of the 11
larger fragments, LRL specimen 10022 and one
smaller fragment are angular; the other nine

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

-

/'

0

Approximate

21

10
cm
Approximate scale

100

Explanation
%

m
'.I!\

Rock fragments: many rocks shown
probably aggregates of fine-grained
material
Fillet of fine-grained material o n the
side of a rock fragment; boundaries
show break i n slope away from fragment
Sharp, irregular depression

TT?

The break i n slope at margin of subdued
depression; hachures point downslope

__

/

1

Axes of shallow troughs

FIGURE
3-32. - Hasselblad photograph AS11-39-5777
and m a p showing t h e region around LRL specimens
10022 and 10028 that was studied.

fragments are rounded. The 11 larger fragments
appear to be randomly scattered over the region
studied. Fragments 1 to 1; cm wide are con;
centrated more heavily than average in two
areas within subdued depressions located west
and northwest of the center of figure 3-32.
Of the 1 fragments larger than 2 cln wide,
1
five rest on the surface, and as many as one-third
to one-half of the other six appear to be buried.
The extent to which fragments smaller than 2

65

cm wide are buried appears to vary uniformly
from almost total burial to no burial.
All the larger fragments have fillets of finegrained material banked against the sides that
are observable in the photographs. The fillets
are approximately 1 to 1% high on the four
cm
largest fragments and are proportionately smaller
on the other seven fragments.
The 1 fragments that measure larger than 2
1
cm wide have no apparent relationship to surrounding features, except for their own fillets.
The clusters of small fragments lying in the west
and northwest sectors of the center of the map
area may be remnants of low-velocity impact
projectiles that formed the craters.
LRL specimen 10022 lay within a level part
of the region, approximately 30 cm from the
edge of the nearest subdued depression. No apparent relationship exists between the specimen
and the subdued depressions. It is conceivable
that the sharp irregular depression 4 cm to the
northeast of LRL specimen 10022 is a secondary
crater from which the specimen skipped. However, the presence of a fillet of fine-grained
material against the specimen suggests that it
had been in place for an appreciable length of
time, probably sufficiently long for any secondary
crater that may have been caused by the specimen to be more subdued than the sharp depression by surface processes.
LRL specimen 10022 is roughly tabular in
form and was slightly embedded in the regolith,
tilted southeast at a low angle to the surface.
The exposed part of the specimen is angular,
and the unexposed part is rounded (fig. 3-33).
The fillet of fine-grained material was approximately 1 cm high and 1% wide, and the fillet
cm
covered the southern part of the upper surface
of the rock. Little of the rock lay below the general level of the surrounding surface. The filletrock contact is marked by a light-colored zone
approximately one-third cm wide on the recovered specimen (fig. 3-33 ).
The fragment nearest LRL specimen 10022,
located 2 cm south of LRL specimen 10022,
was also collected in the contingency sample
and has been tentatively identified as LRL
specimen 10028. LRL specimen 10022 is one of
two crystalline rocks of significant size in the
contingency sample and is dissimilar in appear-

66

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINA.RY SCIENCE REPORT

0

0

1
cm
Approximate

2

1
cm
Approximate

2

FIGURE
3-33. - LRL photographs S-69-45209 and S-6945210 of LRL specimen 10022. ( a ) LRL photograph
S-69-45209. ( b ) LRL photograph S-69-45210.

ance to LRL specimen 10028 and to all the other
fragments in the contingency sample. LRL specimen 10022 is the most angular of the 1 largest
1
fragments in the region studied, which suggests
that LRL specimen 10022 may have been in its
photographed position on the lunar surface for a
shorter period of time than other fragments of
comparable size. However, the crystalline nature of the specimen suggests that it may be
more resistant to erosion, which may also account for its higher degree of angularity. The
more rounded, buried part of the specimen suggests that the underside was at one time the
upper surface and that the underside has been
exposed to lunar surface erosion processes for a
longer time than the present upper side.

Description. LRL specimen 10022 is a smaller
(2 by 4 by 6 cm) specimen of fresh-appearing
vesicular lava and is similar in vesicularity, texture, and crystallinity to many terrestrial basalts.
Smooth-walled vesicles ranging from 0.1 to 4
mm in diameter occupy approximately 15 percent of the rock by volume. Some vesicles are
well oriented into vesicle trains; the vesicles
flatten and partially merge, near one edge of
the specimen, into an incipient zone of platy
jointing. Except where several vesicles have
merged into vuglike cavities, the majority of the
vesicles are either nearly spherical or have been
pulled into prolate spheroids that are apparently
oriented by flow. The vesicle walls appear to be
smooth, but slight modification shows that at
least some of them are coated by a botryoidal
substance with a vitreous luster.
Although the minerals are extremely finegrained, the apparently intergranular to diktytaxitic texture typical of basalt lava can be seen
in the photographs. The texture appears identical to that of many fresh olivine basalts from the
Oregon Cascades. Microlites appear to have been
oriented by flow, and the flow lines deviate
around many of the vesicles in the same pattern
common to terrestrial basalts.
The outside of this specimen shows a higher
albedo than the interior. This condition was possibly caused by the opening up of the cleavages,
grain boundaries, and tiny incipient cracks in
the rock. This whitish rind, which is barely noticeable on the edges of the broken surface in
LRL photograph S-69-45380, penetrates the
rock to a depth of approximately 1 mm. Pits
filled with glassy material and small fractures
containing glassy materials occur on the surface
of the specimen.

LRL Specimens 7 0023 and 7 0032
Geologic environment. LRL specimen 10023
was collected approximately 4 m west of the
+Y footpad. LRL specimen 10032 is believed
to have been collected within a few centimeters
of LRL specimen 10023. A region approxinlately
2.5 by 3 m and centered on the rock (fig. 3-34)
was studied to determine the geologic environment of these specimens. The region is gently
rolling with several broad, subdued, and irregular depressions and four well-defined circular

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

-

0 10 20

40
cm
Approximate scale

f

60

Explanation
?
.

.: I
.

0
TTT

Rock fragments; many rocks shown
probably aggregates of fine-grained
material
Fillet of fine-grained material o n the side
of a rock fragment; boundaries show the
break i n slope away from t h e fragment
Sharp, irregular depression
The break i n slope at margin of subdued
depression; hachures point downslope

2 1 Axes of shallow troughs

FIGURE - Hasselblad photograph ASH-39-5774
3-34.
and map showing the region around LRL specimens
10023 and 10032 that was studied.

craters. One circular crater has a distinct raised
rim around three-quarters of its circumference.
LRL specimens 10023 and 10032 are embedded
on the western edge of a subdued, irregular de-

67

pression in a part of the surface that slopes
gently to the east.
Two well-defined sets of linear features extend across the region studied. The first set consists of both slightly curved and straight troughs
that range in length from approximately 2 cm to
approximately 10 to 15 cm and trend in a northeasterly direction. This set is best seen when
figure 3-34 is viewed obliquely from the upper
right-hand corner.
Within the northeast set of lineations, a northtrending zone approximately 15 to 20 cm has
wide straight troughs that trend northeast and
curved troughs that trend in a northerly direction. This zone is most noticeable when figure
3-34 is viewed obliquely from the upper lefthand corner. The north-trending zone is on part
of the surface that slopes gently toward the west,
where the lower angle of lighting enhances the
detectability of subtle breaks in slope.
The second set of linear features may be seen
in the Hasselblad photographs as ridges, narrow
troughs, and subtle tonal differences that trend
in a northwesterly direction. These features can
be seen best by viewing figure 3-34 obliquely
from the upper right-hand and lower left-hand
corners.
Approximately 1000 fragments between fi and
1 cm wide, 35 fragments between 1 and 6 cm
wide, and two fragments 15 cn? wide are scattered over the region studied. LRL specimen
10023 is the third largest fragment in the area.
Most fragments of intermediate size are angular,
but LRL specimen 10023 is rounded on the side
facing the LM. One of the two largest fragments
is very rounded, and the other has a prominent
flat face. The small fragments are locally concentrated in low areas and are absent from
higher areas. In addition, the number of small
fragments tends to decrease toward the south
and southeast.
Most larger fragments (1 to 20 cm wide) do
not appear to be related to the depression in the
surface. However, fragments measuring 1 to 3
cm wide that surround the two sharper depressions in the southwest part of the region could
be pieces of projectiles that caused the two depressions. Impact of the larger rock in the northwest part of the region studied could have

68

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

formed the depression that lies immediately to
the right of the rock.
Most small fragments rest on the surface or
are buried only slightly, as suggested by the
relatively long, sharp shadows they cast. The
intermediate and large fragments (1 to 15 cm
wide) have fillets or embankments of finegrained material around their visible sides.
On the two largest fragments and on LRL
specimen 10023, the fillets appear to be better
developed or perhaps restricted to the southeast faces. The fillets have gradational boundaries that change to sharp boundaries as they
are traced from left to right around the southeast faces of the rocks. The distribution of the
fillet is especially well shown on the large rock
near the western edge of the region studied.
Examination of stereophotographs AS11405856
and ASll40-5857 shows that the southeast face
of the rock, which'appears to overhang the lunar
surface slightly, has a fillet that extends approximately two-thirds up the face and ends abruptly
at the southwest corner of the rock.
These relationships suggest that the fillets
were either formed from or enhanced by material moving toward the northwest, that is, parallel to the northwest set of lineations. Possibly
both the fillets and the northwest-trending lineations have been partly formed from or enhanced by fine-grained material swept along the
lunar surface by the effluent of the LM descent
propulsion system.
Neither LRL specimen 10023 nor LRL specimen 10032 has any evident genetic relationship
to the local depressions and craters or to either
large or small fragments in the region studied.
Like the other large fragments, LRL specimen
10023 has a well-developed fillet on the southeast face. If the fillets are of natural origin, the
presence of the fillet on the LRL specimen 10023
indicates that the specimen was located in the
position in which it was found for at least the
period of time that was required for the fillet to
be formed. However, if the fillets near the LM
have been built largely during the landing by
the descent engine effects, then LRL specimen
10023 could have been emplaced fairly recently.
Description.LRL specimen 10023has an ovoid
shape and is tapered at one end, with a broadly
rounded side and a nearly flat side. The specimen

Top view

Explanation
@

Breccia fragments showing light-colored crystals

$8

Light-colored crystals a n d crystal aggregates

0

Irregular depressions

4 Fractures
-- --.
.
.

Faint layering
Shadowed area

0

-

Pit
Scarp; hachures indicate downside

FIGURE
3-35. - Photographs and maps of LRL specimen
10023. ( a ) LRL photograph S-69-45394 and map
showing the view from southwest of the specimen.

GEOLOGIC SETTING O F LUNAR SAMPLES

is approximately 5.5 cm long, 2 to 3 cm wide, and
1.5 to 2 cm thick. Part of the rounded side is
covered with fine dust, but the flat side is fairly
free of dust and reveals that the specimen is a
fine-grained clastic rock with scattered subrounded rock fragments of up to 5 mm in diameter.
The rounded ovoid shape of the specimen
(fig. 3-35(a)) is irregular in detail. In the central part of the rounded side, a broad depression
is formed by many coalescing, shallow, and irregular cavities and round pits. Adjacent to this
depression, toward the tapered "front" end,
round deep pits are abundant and so closely
spaced that some pits intersect others and indicate more than one generation of pitting. Fewer
of these pits were evident near the edges of the
specimen, and none could be identified from the
photograph of the flat side of the specimen.

69

The flat side of the specimen (fig. 3 3 5 ( b ) ) is
marked by two parallel flat surfaces separated
by an irregular longitudinal scarp approximately
?h to 1mm high. A few small cavities are present,
but no round pits of the type found on the
rounded side appear. An irregular fracture pattern occurs on the flat side. The fractures are
short, discontinuous, and largely filled with dust.
On the rounded side of the rock, near the
tapered end, is a set of short fractures, 3 to 9

end
Oblique view of front, top,and right side
Bottom and partial side view

FIGURE (continued). - (b) LRL photograph S-693-35
45393 and map of the flat side of the specimen.

FIGURE3-35 '(concluded). - ( c ) LRL photograph S-6945387 and map showing the pits on the rounded side
of the specimen.

70

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

mm long. These fractures are largely dust filled
and do not appear to penetrate far into the
rock. On a few sides and corners, short, curved
fractures exist, which may be exfoliation features.
The numerous pits on the rounded side of the
specimen (fig. 3-35(c)) range in size from approximately 0.3 to 2.3 mm. Most of these pits
are deep, but some of the larger ones are shallow
and bowl shaped. Many have raised rims, and
some of the rims are surrounded by narrow,
whitish halos. The larger pits grade in shape
into irregular cavities and depressions. Cavities
appear to be a composite of merged pits of
various sizes. On the edges and flat side of the
rock, the irregular cavities are few and small
(mostly less than 1 mm long), and they appear
to be caused by the dropping out of one or more
lithic fragments or mineral grains.
LRL specimen 10023 is a fine-grained clastic
rock containing widely and irregularly scattered,
subangular rock fragments. The average grain
size of the distinguishable fine material is approximately 0.2 mm. The rock fragments range
from 0.5 to 4 mm and are mostly concentrated
near the tapered end of the specimen, although
fairly large fragments appear in other parts of
the specimen. Most of the fine material consists
of medium-gray, angular to subangular grains.
Scattered through this matrix are white grains,
many of them tabular or lath shaped, which resemble crystals and cleavage fragments. A few
white grains appear to be curved and others are
Y-shaped, which gives them the appearance of
shards. These white grains range in size from
0.2 to 1 mm in length. Some of the larger laths
show partial separation along apparent cleavage
planes.
The larger rock fragments or clasts all seem to
be fine-grained crystalline rocks with the texture
of basalt. Randomly oriented, lath-shaped white
"crystals" compose 40 to 60 percent of these
rocks and are enclosed by a matrix of smaller
gray minerals. The average grain size of the
crystals is approximately 0.5 mm. Although many
of the rock clasts are elongate, there appears to
be no preferred orientation.
A faint layering that is essentially parallel to
the flat face of the rock can be traced on the
lower sides of the specimen. The layers are 1mm

or less in thickness and seem to be marked by
alternating coarser and finer textures. Some of
the elongate white grains appear to be concentrated along thin layers and are oriented parallel
to the planar structure.
LRL specimen 10032 is bounded by numerous
irregular faces that show no apparent control
by joints or other platy structures. Most faces
are remarkably fresh with only slightly rounded
edges and corners. One face, however (fig.
3-36(a)), is smoothly undulating with more
rounded edges and corners, and this face is
therefore assumed to have been the top as the
specimen rested on the lunar surface. This orientation is consistent with the correlation of
LRL specimen 10032 with rock D in figures
3-19 and 3-22. The specimen has a pointed end,
which is believed to have been oriented toward
the LM landing site. No evidence remains of an
apron or fillet of fine particles having been
banked up against the sides of the specimen.
Irregular vesicles ranging in size from approximately 0.2 to 1 mm wide are unevenly scattered
throughout the rock, but most are concentrated
in two zones 5 to 6 mm apart, as shown in figure
3-36(b). Most of these vesicles show a parallel
elongation and form a distinct lineation that is
interpreted to represent the direction of flow of
lava. Two larger, nearly spherical vesicles 1 and
2 mm wide appear on two of the faces. Most of
the vesicles seem to be lined with smooth specular material, but in a few vesicles, small crystals are visible on the walls.
LRL specimen 10023 is a breccia of small
subangular lithic fragments in an extremely finegrained matrix. The specimen strongly resembles
the material of the regolith, as photographed by
the Apollo Lunar Stereo Closeup Camera, except that this specimen is strongly indurated.
The shape and distribution of pits suggest that
the rounded side of the specimen was formerly
the top surface and that the flat side was the
bottom surface. However, the specimen was not
oriented with the flat side down at the time it
was collected; both the rounded and the flat
sides were partially buried in the regolith. Probably the rock had not been in its last position on
the lunar surface for a substantially long period
of time.
Description. LRL specimen 10032 is a small

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

Top view

Explanation
'4

Light-colored crystals and crystal aggregates

1

Light-colored crystal aggregates
Nearly complete dust cover

Bottom and end view

Shadowed area

O

Irregular pits
Small pits with white halos

0

Small vesicles (?)

FIGURE
3-36 (continued). - ( b ) LRL photograph S-6946007 and map of the bottom and end of the specimen.

Small fractures
Small, bright spherules

FIGURE - Photographs and maps of LRL specimen
3-36.
10032. ( a ) LRL photograph S-69-46010 and map of
the top of the specimen.

irregular rock fragment, approximately 2 cm long,
1cm wide, and ?icm thick (the 12th largest from
the contingency sample), whose location has been

tentatively identified on the lunar surface. Study
of the specimen has been based on LRL photographs S-69-46006 to S-6946015, in which the
specimen is enlarged approximately six times.
The different views are stereoscopic.
On the assumed top of the specimen, a few
scattered small, round pits appear that seem different from the vesicles. These pits are 0.2 to
0.4 mm wide and several are surrounded by a

72

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

Side view
Bottom and end view

FIGURE
3-36 (continued). - ( c ) LRL photograph S-69-

FIGURE (continued). - ( d ) LRL photograph S-693-36
46012 and map of the side of the specimen.

46014 and map of the bottom and end of the specimen.

narrow, light-gray to white halo that is slightly
raised in places. The origin of these pits is not
clear, but their presence on only one face supports the interpretation that this face is the top
side. The scarcity of pits of this type on the
specimen, compared to pits of this type on the
rounded tops of other returned lunar specimens,
suggests that LRL specimen 10032 has been
exposed for a short period of time.
LRL specimen 10032 is a fine-grained microcrystalline rock with a well-developed "diabasic"
texture showing on some of the faces. The grain
size averages between 0.1 and 0.2 mm. Abundant randomly oriented, lath-shaped, light-gray

to white crystals resembling plagioclase form
a feltlike network in a matrix of more equidimensional grains that are barely resolved in
photographs that have been enlarged six times.
The lath-shaped crystals, some of which are remarkably long and narrow, range from 0.2 to 1
mm long and from 0.1 to 0.2 mm wide. The
longest crystals are shown best in figure 336(c).
The matrix has a grain size of approximately
0.1 mm. Other views of LRL specimen 10032
are shown in figures 3-36(d) and 3-36(e).
The textural features of LRL specimen 10032
seem to clearly indicate an igneous origin, and
the grain size, diabasic texture, and vesicle
trains strongly suggest the derivation of the
specimen from a lava flow, perhaps of diabase
or diabasic basalt.

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

Bottom and side view
I

0

I

I

I

S

I

J

.5
ern

1
(e)

FIGURE
3-36 (concluded). - ( e ) LRL photograph S-6946008 and map of the bottom and side of the specimen.

LRL Specimen 10046
Geologic environment. LRL specimen 10046
was collected in the bulk sample and has been
identified in photographs of the lunar surface.
Photographs
ASll-405453,
ASll40-5738,

73

AS 1140-5761, AS1140-5762, ASll40-5790,
and ASll40-5853 were taken from the LM
windows. These photographs provide stereoscopic coverage but only with a very short
stereoscopic base.
A region approximately 1.2 by 2.0 m surrounding LRL specimen 10046 was studied, and
the region was mapped from photograph AS1140-5853 (fig. 3-37). The rock was collected approximately 4 m west-southwest of the center of
the spacecraft +Z footpad. The sample site is
on the northeast rim of the double crater located
southwest of the LM landing site. The rim of
the double crater, where LRL specimen 10046
was collected, is broadly convex and pockmarked with many small craters. The subdued
raised rim of a 2-m-diameter crater lies 15 cm
south of the sample site, and many smaller subdued craters 15 to 20 cm in diameter are present within several meters of the sample site.
Elongate troughs a fraction of a centimeter
deep, X to 2 cm wide, and 4 to 30 cm long are
prominent features in this locality. Two sets of
troughs, which are similar in size, shape, and
distribution, are present. One set of troughs appears to trend roughly north-northwest, and the
other set of troughs appears to trend roughly
west-northwest. (A more precise orientation of
the troughs, considering local surface slopes, will
be obtained from photogrammetric reduction of
the photographs. )
Approximately 1300 fragments between !L and
3 cm wide, 50 fragments between 3 and 8 cm
wide, and eight fragments between 8 and 15 cm
wide are scattered over the region studied. The
largest rocks in the region studied comprise six
angular and six rounded rocks or rock groups
and LRL specimen 10046, which is subrounded.
While the fragments smaller than 8 cm wide are
randomly scattered over the surface, those larger
than 8 cm wide are concentrated in the western
two-thirds of the region studied (fig. 3 3 7 ) .
Three of the fragments shown by figure 3-37
to be angular appear to be partly buried, and
five angular fragments appear to rest on the
lunar surface. As many as one-third to one-half
of the rounded fragments shown appear to be
buried. The LRL specimen 10046 is resting on
the lunar surface. The extent to which the other,

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

74

smaller fragments are buried varies uniformly
from almost total burial to no burial.
All but one of the larger fragments have fillets

Approximate
cm
Approximate scale

Explanation

(3

LRL specimen 10046
Rounded rock fragment
Angular rock fragment

)

4-

Rock fragment
Fillet of fine-grained material on the side of
a rock fragment; boundaries show the break
i n slope away from the fragment

,,
,

The break i n slope at the margin of a subdued
depression of a crater; hachures point downslope

-

Axis of shallow trough

FIGURE3-37. - Hasselblad photograph ASll-40-5853
and map showing the region around LRL specimen
10046 that was studied.

of fine-grained material banked against the sides
that are observable in the photographs. The
fillets are approximately 1 to 2 cm high on the
large fragments. No correlation between the
height of the fillets and the angularity of the
rocks has been established.
The relatively large, angular fragments appear from the LM window partial panoramas to
be more abundant in the vicinity of the 2-mdiameter crater (upper left, fig. 3-37). The possibility exists that the angular blocks were ejected
from within the regolith (from the 2m-diameter
crater) and that the rounded fragments have
been exposed at the lunar surface for a longer
period of time. It is also possible that the angular
fragments are more resistant to lunar surface
"
erosive processes than are the rounded fragments.
The LRL specimen 10046 is unique among the
rocks in the small block field. Photographs and
maps of this specimen are shown in figure 3-38.
The specimen is only slightly embedded in the
regolith (no more than 1 or 2 cm) and is the
only rounded fragment that protrudes markedly
above the surface. The specimen is the only
large fragment of equant shape. The fillet extends approximately 1 cm high on the specimen.
The lack of burial. and low fillet of the specimen
suggest that it has been in its present position
for a short period of time. However, the large
number of pits on the lunar top surface of the
specimen (fig. 3 3 8 ( e ) ) suggests that the upper
surface of the specimen has been subjected to
lunar surface processes for a long period of time.
Description. LRL specimen 10046 is a large
rounded rock that was collected in the bulk
sample. Six stereoscopic orthogonal views of the
specimen were photographed. Arbitrary numbers and relative orientations have been assigned
to the respective faces as follows:
Face no.

Figure no.

Photographs

1 (front)
3-38 ( a ) S-6945614 to S-69-45616
2 (right side) 3 3 8 ( b ) S-6945611 to S-6945613 and
S-6945623 to S-6945625
3 (rear)
3 3 8 ( c ) S-6945609 land S-6945610
4 (left side) 3 3 8 ( d ) S-6945617 to S-6945619 and
S-6945629 to S-6945631
8-69-45620 to S-6945622
5 (top)
338(e)
S-6945626 to S-6945628
6 (bottom) 3-38(f)

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

Face 1 ( f r o 5

Face 2 (right side)
Explanation

- ..
.
:
'

Large, light clast
Small,lightclasts

@

Heavy dust coating on the surface
Moderate dust coating on the surface
Light dust coat~ng the surface
on
Shadowed area

- Fracture

--

-----

Subtle trough or base of subtle scarp; probably
the eroded edge of a resistant internal layer; i n
places, light-colored clasts are alined along
adjacent ridges
Irregular cavity

0

Pit, commonly with raised r i m and light-colored halo

FIGURE
3-38. -Photographs and maps of LRL specimen
10046. ( a ) LRL photograph S-69-45616 and map of
the front (face 1) of the specimen.

FIGURE
3-38 (continued). - ( b ) LRL photograph S-6945613 and map of the right side (face 2 ) of the specimen.

LRL specimen 10046 was oriented before collection (fig. 3-28) with face 1 to the southwest,
face 2 to the southeast, face 3 to the northeast,
face 4 to the northwest, and faces 5 and 6 as
the top and bottom, respectively. Fine particles
partly obscure faces 1, 3, 4, and 6.
LRL specimen 10046 is roughly ovoid, measures approximately 10 by 8 by 7.5 cm, and has
three approximately orthogonal flattened sides
(faces 3, 4, and 6). Face 1is a relatively smooth,
convex surface with a deep irregular indentation
in the upper right corner. Face 2 is smoothly

76

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE
3-38 ( continued ). - ( c ) LRL photograph S-6945609 and map of the rear (face 3 ) of the specimen.

rounded on the top and left sides and is irregularly broken at the bottom and the right sides.
Face 3 is virtually flat but has sharp irregular
indentations scattered over it. Face 4 is a rough,
broken surface that is largely coated with fine
particles. The lunar top surface of the specimen
(face 5 ) is gently domed, smooth on a coarse
scale, and densely pitted on a fine scale. The
lunar bottom surface of the specimen is virtually planar and is heavily covered with fine
particles.
Subtle troughs and ridges, which are approximately parallel with the base of the specimen,
are visible on faces 1, 2, 3, and 4. These troughs
and ridges are probably the eroded edges of a
series of resistant layers that are most easily

Face 4 (left side)

FIGURE
3-38 (continued). - ( d ) LRL photograph S-6945619 and map of the left side (face 4 ) of the specimen.

visible where the rock surfaces are obliquely
lighted. The stratiform appearance of the specimen is enhanced by a very slight sorting of fine
and coarse clasts in alternate layers and by the
discontinuous local alinement of light-colored
clasts.
A fracture system, which is most strongly developed on the lunar south and is displayed on
faces 1, 2, and 6, cuts the specimen. One series
of fractures can be traced approximately parallel
with the base across face 2. Another set of arcu-

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

Face 5 (top)
u
0
1
2
cm

Face 6 (bottom)

u
0

1
cm

2

FIGURE (continued). - ( e ) LRL photograph S-693-38
45622 and map of the lunar top (face 5) of the specimen.

FIGURE
3-38 (concluded ). - ( f ) LRI, photograph S-69-

ate fractures oriented from vertical to almost
horizontal can be seen in faces 1 and 2. The
orientation of the two arcuate fractures concentric with face 2 suggests that the fractures
may be the inner boundaries of exfoliation shells.
Shallow circular pits that occur on the lunar
top surface of the specimen appear less frequently on other faces of the specimen. The pits
range in size from less than % to 3 mm in diameter. Most of the pits have a specular lining,
which is generally of either a botryoidal or a

radially ridged form. The pits commonly have
raised rims with subdued to sharp profiles.
Raised rims are commonly bounded by steep
or reversed (undercut) outer slopes. Some of
the sharp-rimmed pits have light-colored halos
with diameters four times as great as the pit.
The pits are unevenly distributed on the six
faces of LRL specimen 10046. They are most
abundant on the lunar top surface of the specimen and occur with decreasing abundance on
faces 2, 1, 6 (bottom), 3, and 4. On the top

45628 and map of the lunar bottom (face 6 ) of the
specimen.

78

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

surface, the pits are closely spaced, and some
pits are superimposed on other pits. In some
cases, old pits are almost totally destroyed by
superposition of younger pits. On the top surface
and on faces 1 and 2, the number of pits increases rapidly with decreasing diameter between
a 3-mm and a $4-mm pit diameter. Too few pits
are visible on faces 3 and 4 to judge the sizefrequency distribution. On the bottom, which is
largely coated with fine particles, only large
pits are easily detected. Pits of a given size tend
to cluster; that is, several pits of approxinately
the same size and degree of freshness tend to be
found in proximity.
Irregular cavities are present on faces 2, 3, 4,
and 5. These cavities range in size from 1 to 4
mm on the surface of the specimen and vary
from very shallow to very deep. In some cases,
the bottom and sides of the cavities are in
shadow in all available photographs. The edges
of these cavities range from irregular to smooth
and from sharp-edged to subdued. The visible
interiors of the cavities are commonly specular.
On faces 2 and 4, some of the deep cavities are
rounded in outline and interconnected. In several cases, the cavities are alined and tapered as
though drawn out. Most of the irregular cavities
occur in the rock matrix, but a few occur in
large lithic clasts. These latter cavities may be
vesicles.
The surface in which greatest pitting is evident is bounded in part by a short scarp (possibly 1 mm high) that defines a fairly continuous cap or rind on the rock. A cross section
of the cap is revealed in the scarp. The upper
surface of the cap is lighter gray than the surrounding sides of the rock and, except for pitting,
exhibits no throughgoing structures. In a cross
section, the cap exhibits a fine-textured hackly
appearance, and microfractures that occur in
the cap do not persist into the rock below.
Major fractures penetrating the body of the rock
do not cut the cap.
The rock is an aggregate of clasts consisting
of approximately 10- to 20-percent recognizable
irregular lithic fragments and possibly crystal
fragments in a very fine-grained heterogeneous
matrix. The average grain size of the matrix is
less than 0.1 mm. The matrix consists predominantly of medium-gray grains with scattered

light- and dark-gray clasts. Light-gray angular
clasts occur bimodally both within the matrix
and as coarse clasts. As a matrix constituent,
these clasts range in size from less than 0.1 mm
to approximately 1.5 mm. Coarse clasts of lightgray material range in diameter from approximately 5 mm to 3 cm.
The coarse, light-gray clasts are angular and
irregular but are equant or rarely tabular in
form. The clasts have sharp contacts with the
matrix. Some of the finer clasts are dull, some
are highly reflective, and some appear to be
fragments of single crystals. One fragment on
face 1 resembles a zoned feldspar with an
altered core and twinned rim. At least two types
of rock are represented in the larger light-gray
clasts. One is a very fine-grained vesicular rock
that is well represented by large clasts on face
4. The other rock is crystalline with an average
grain size of approximately 0.3 mm.
Dark-gray clasts are scattered throughout the
matrix but are the least abundant of the three
photometrically distinguishable components. Individual grains range from less than 0.1 to
0.2 mm, but locally they are spatially concentrated to form an irregular, subrounded aggregate of several millimeters in width (lower center
of face 1).
In a few cases, light-gray clasts stand in relief
above the surrounding matrix, which suggests
that these clasts are more resistant to processes
of erosion occurring on the Moon. In contrast,
aggregates of dark-gray clasts (face 1 ) appear to
erode in negative relief.
LRL specimen 10046 is a microbreccia. The
general character and distribution of its component fragments are similar to those exhibited
by photographs of the unconsolidated surface
material taken by the lunar closeup camera. This
similarity suggests that the specimen may have
been derived by a process of induration of the
unconsolidated surface material. The subtle
stratification that is visible on three faces of the
rock may have been produced by the process
of induration, or it may indicate a sedimentary
layering process. The external form of the specimen has probably been influenced by at least
four separate processes: (1) fracturing of the
body rock, (2) exfoliation, (3) pitting, and (4)
surface erosion (or ablation).

79

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

LRL specimen 10046 has a complex history of
movement on the lunar surface, and this history
is reflected in its surface form. The most angular
face (face 3) is oriented toward the northeast,
and the least angular face (face 6) is on the
bottom. The lack of pitting on face 3 indicates
that this face was probably the bottom of the
specimen at one time, leaving faces 1 and 6
exposed to processes of pitting. At some time
in the recent past, possibly at the time one of
the nearby craters was formed, the rock was
reoriented. This reorientation exposed face 3
to erosion. The general rounding of the surface,
the fracturing of the body of the rock, and the
fact that three faces of the rock are relatively
angular suggest that the reorienting process may
have happened more than once and that the
process may have happened at irregular intervals of time.
LRL Specimen T 0047
Description. LRL specimen 10047, which is a
small rock from the bulk sample box, was collected within 8 m of the LM &om a region on
either the northwest or the southwest side of
the LM landing site. The specimen has not yet
been identified in photographs of the lunar
surface. The specimen has an unusually angular
shape, except for one side that appears to have
been rounded off by lunar erosional processes,
and the rounded side is assumed in ti descriphs
tion to be the top side. The maximum dimensions
are approximately 5.5 cm in length, 4 cm in
width, and 3.3 cm in thickness. Although much
of the specimen is covered by a thin, darkcolored coating of fine particles, a finely crystalIine texture shows on parts of most faces, and a
faint but dehite primary foliation shows on the
top and one end of the spe&men.
This study is based on LRL photographs
S-69-45632 to S-69-45655. A total of 24 photographs, in which the rock was enlarged approximately three times its original size, gave excellent stereoscopic coverage and good definition
of the structural and textural features (fig. 3-39).
As viewed from the top (LRL photographs
S-69-45644 to S-69-45646), LRL specimen 10047
is roughly rectanguIar in shape. This shape is
apparently controlled by a conjugate system of
small, irregular joints; but the unusual angu-

Top view

0

1

cm

2

Explanation

**

White crystals
White crystal aggregates
Black, shiny, crystal clots or segregations
Ovoid grains

Heavy dust coating on surface
Moderate dust coating on surface
Light dust coating on surface
Shadow
Small, round pits
Small pits with white halos
Irregular cavities or vugs
Irregular fractures

FIGURE
3-39. - Photographs and maps of LRL

specimen

10047. ( a ) LRL photograph S-69-45644 and map of
the top of the specimen.

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

Rear
end

u

0

1

2

cm
Bottom view

FIGURE
3-39 ( continued). - ( b ) LRL photograph S-6945649 and map of the bottom of the specimen.

larity (exhibited on the other faces) is caused by
another system of joints that intersects the first
system at angles of 20° to 4S0 and by the occurrence of irregular fractures. The bottom of the
specimen (LRL photographs S-69-45649 to S69-45651), with faces meeting at an angle of
approximately 70°, exhibits the most angular
edge. This edge may have been embedded in
the regolith to a depth of 1 to 2 cm. Other
edges are considerably more rounded, particularly those that bound the top surface.
Two types of small fractures appear on various faces, particularly on the rounded top of
the rock. One type consists of fairly straight,
short (1 to 2 cm) fractures that are roughly
parallel to the faces of the rock. Most fractures

Front end

u

0

1
cm

2

FIGURE
3-39 (continued). - ( c ) LRL photograph S-6945647 and map of the front of the specimen.

are partially filled with fine particles. The second
type consists of curved fractures that are roughly
parallel to the rounded ends and edges of the
rock. In detail, these fractures are irregular,
partly open, and bordered in part by crumbly
granular material. The fractures appear to bound

GEOLOGIC SETTIN(

F,
I81

LUNAR SAMPLES

/

n

Out of focus

Side view

0

1
cm

2

Side view

FIGURE
3-39 (continued). - ( d ) LRL photograph S-6945633 and map of the side of the specimen.

a series of exfoliation shells that are most prominent on the rounded top.
Scattered over the various faces of the specimen are irregular cavities or vugs that are 0.5
to 2.5 cm long. The cavities are most abundant
on one of the bottom faces. Small crystals can
be seen projecting from the cavity walls at various angles. Because of their extreme irregularity
in shape and distribution, these vugs do not
appear to be ordinary vesicles; they resemble
cavities formed by leaching or by removal of
some unknown mineral or mineral aggregates.
The crystals projecting from the walls seen1 to be
integral to the fabric of the rock, rather than
having been deposited in the vugs.
Small pits 0.2 to 1.5mm in diameter are irregularly scattered over the top surface of the specimen, and a few pits appear on the sides of the

u

0

1
cm

2

(e)

FIGURE (continued). - ( e ) LRL photograph S-693-39
45638 and map of the side of the specimen.

specimen. Some of the pits are steep sided as
though drilled, while others are conical with
raised rims. Several of the pits are surrounded by
a white halo that seems to be composed of an
array of white mineral grains with a slightly
raised outer margin.
The texture of LRL specimen 10047 is best
seen on a side face that is shown by LRL photographs S-69-45632 to S-69-45634 and is sketched
on LRL photograph S-69-45633. The rock appears to be holocrystalline with an average grain
size of approximately 0.5 mm, although some
crystals are slightly more than 1 mm in length.
At least two components can be recognized.
White, lath-shaped to stubby rectangular crys-

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

,

0

Rear end
1
cm

2

FIGURE
3-39 ( concluded ). - ( f ) LRL photograph S-6945652 and map of the rear of the specimen.

tals resembling plagioclase make up approximately 50 percent of the rock. The distribution
of the crystals gives the rock a slightly diabasic
texture. The crystals range from 0.3 to 1.2 mm
long, and many are grouped into aggregates as

large as 2 mm in diameter. Some of these aggregates exhibit a faint cleavage that is typical of
plagioclase, especially on a relatively fresh
broken surface such as that shown in LRL photograph S-69-45561.
Surrounding the white crystals is a more finely
granular matrix of dark-gray to nearly black
minerals of approximately 0.2- to 0.5-mm grain
size. Many of these minerals appear as stubby
subhedral prisms that exhibit brightly reflectant
crystal and cleavage faces. Locally, these dark
grains are grouped in aggregates or clots up to
2 mm in diameter. Whether the dark grains represent one mineral or more than one mineral
cannot be discerned from the photographs.
Fresh broken surfaces shown in LRL photograph S-69-45561 exhibit, on the top and upper
sides, a thin surface crust approximately 1 mm
or less thick of high albedo, in contrast to the
darker tone of the fresh interior. The extreme
whiteness that characterizes the surface of the
crystals, resembling plagioclase, and the relatively high reflectivity of other grains are apparently caused by a lunar weathering process.
Shock metamorphism, a process by which the
minerals on the surface may have been minutely
shattered by the impacts of many small particles
on the rock, seem to be the most reasonable
explanation for the formation of this crust. Shock
effects may also account for the white halos that
are evident around many of the round pits.
On the rounded top and on one end of LRL
specimen 10047, the white crystals and aggregates exhibit a crude but distinct foliation, which
trends roughly parallel to the long dimension
of the top surface and dips at a steep angle to
this surface. Many of the lath-shaped crystals
are oriented almost parallel with the foliation
and, along with crystal aggregates, are concentrated in crude layers. This foliation is similar
to primary flow structures in both extrusive and
intrusive terrestrial igneous rocks.
The textural features and general appearance
of LRL specimen 10047 strongly suggest an
igneous origin, but the medium-grain size could
be characteristic of either a thick lava flow or a
small intrusive body such as a dike. The faint
foliation indicates the small intrusive body to be
the better choice. The specimen resembles a
terrestrial diabasic basalt or fine-grained gibbro.

GEOLOGIC SETTING OF LUNAR SAMPLES

References
3-1. MILTON, J.: Geologic Map of Theophilus QuadD.
rangle of the Moon: Geologic Atlas of the Moon,
Scale 1:1,000,000. U.S.G.S. Map 1-546 (LAC 78),
1968.
R.
,
E.
3-2. HEACOCK, L.; K ~ P E RG. P.; SHOEMAKER, M.;
UREY,H. C.; and 'WHITAKER, A.: InterpretaE.
tion of Ranger VII Records: Ranger VII, Part 11,
Experimenters' Analyses and Interpretations. TR
32-700, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Calif. Inst.
Tech., 1965, pp. 9-73.

83

T.
3-3. MCCORD, B.: Color Differences on the Lunar
Surface. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 74, no. 12, 1969,
pp. 3131-3142.
P.
W.
3-4. MULLER, M.; and SJOGREN, L.: Mascons:
Lunar Mass Concentrations. Science, vol. 161,
1969, pp. 680-684.
E.
E.
R.
3-5. SHOEMAKER, M.; MORRIS, C.; BATSON, M.;
K.
D. R.;
HOLT,H. E.; LARSON, B.; MONTGOMERY,
RENNILSON, J.; and WHITAKER,E. A.: TeleJ.
vision Observations from Surveyor. TR 32-1265,
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Calif. Inst. Tech.,
1969, pp. 21-136.

4. Apollo 7 7 Soil Mechanics investigation
N. C. Costes, W. D. Carrier, J. K. Mitchell, and R. F. Scott

The Apollo 11 lunar landing mission afforded
man the first opportunity for direct collection of
data relating to the physical characteristics and
mechanical behavior of the surface materials of
an extraterrestrial body by other than remote
means. In particular, the first manned lunar landing provided a unique capability for acquiring
information that would aid in the accomplishment of the following broad objectives:
( 1 ) To enhance the scientific understanding of
the nature and origin of the materials, and the
mechanisms and processes responsible for the
present morphofogy and consistency of the lunar
surface
( 2 ) To provide engineering data on the interaction of manned systems and manned operations
with the lunar surface, thereby aiding in the
evaluation of the Apollo 1 mission, and in the
1
planning of future lunar surface scientific investigations and related engineering tasks supporting these activities
To obtain this information, the Apollo Program Office directed that a Soil Mechanics Investigation be included in the scientific experiments
1
planned for the Apollo 1 mission. The investigator team was charged with the responsibility
for the systematic acquisition and analysis of
lunar soil mechanics data to insure maximum
return of geotechnical information from each
facet of the planned lunar surface operations.
Specific scientific objectives of the Soil Mechanics Investigation at the Apollo 1 landing
1
site included the following:
( 1 ) To verify lunar soil models previously
formulated from Earth-based observations and
laboratory investigations and from lunar orbiting
and unmanned lunar landing missions
( 2 ) To determine the extent of variability in
lunar soil properties with depth and lateral position

( 3 ) To aid in the interpretation of geological
observations, sampling, and general documentation of maria features
In addition, the Soil Mechanics Investigation
was aimed toward the following engineering objectives :
( 1 ) To obtain information relating to the interaction of the lunar module ( L M ) with the lunar
surface during landing and to lunar soil erosion
caused by the spacecraft engine exhaust
( 2 ) To provide a basis for altering mission
plans because of unexpected conditions
( 3 ) To assess the effect of lunar soil properties on astronaut and surface vehicle mobility
( 4 ) To obtain at least qualitative information
needed for the deployment, installation, operation, and maintenance of scientific and engineering stations and equipment to be used in extended
lunar exploration
Knowledge of Lunar Surface Mechanical
Properties Before Flight

No attempt will be made in this section to give
a complete history of the development of the
state of knowledge of the lunar surface mechanical properties. The purpose of this discussion is
to provide a background for better evaluation of
the results of the mission and to make comparisons between the properties that have been deduced from various sources. Using these comparisons, the reliability of different sets of measurements can be assessed, and the suitability of
1
the techniques used prior to Apollo 1 can be
evaluated.
Several sources of preflight information about
lunar surface mechanical properties exist. These
sources of information include ground-based
visual observations, thermal measurements, radio
and radar measurements, the lunar surface pho-

86

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

tographs obtained by the U.S. Ranger and Lunar
Orbiter spacecraft, the data from landings of the
Soviet Luna 9 and Luna 13 spacecraft, and the
direct estimates of the lunar surface properties
derived from the five soft landings of the U.S.
Surveyor spacecraft.
The results of the Surveyor spacecraft tests
and analyses led to the construction of a lunar
soil model of an essentially incompressible,
slightly cohesive soil that is composed primarily
of grains ranging in size from silt to fine sand.
The lunar soil behaved in a manner similar to
the behavior of terrestrial soils with a density of
approximately 1.5 g/cc. A cohesion of approximately 0.1 psi and a friction angle of 3S0 to 37'
(in the normal pressure range of a few psi) satisfactorily represented the mechanical properties
observations made of the lunar material to a
depth of several inches. Where the soil extends
to depths greater than several inches, an increase
in strength with depth was observed. In places,
the soil may overlie rock fragments that are only
a few inches or less beneath the surface. (More
information can be found in refs. 41 to 411.)
Postulated Soil Behavior During Descent and
Touchdown of the

L
M

On the basis of the previously discussed lunar
soil model, various soils have been postulated
and used for calculations related to the descent
and landing of the LM on the lunar surface.
Some of these computations have been concerned with the dynamics of the 1anding;l for
example, from computations, LM footpad penetrations of 4 to 6 in. were expected in a simultaneous four-point touchdown at a vertical
downward velocity of 3 fps and at zero lateral
velocity, if the lunar soil extended to a depth of
one or two times the footpad diameter (i.e., 3 to
6 ft).
The effect of the descent propulsion system
(DPS) engine exhaust on the soil surface has
also been studied from several viewpoints. If the
lunar surface is considered to consist of soil
grains in the postulated size range, but is taken
to be impervious to gas flow, calculations by
Hutton (ref. 4 1 2 ) indicated the extent of lunar
soil surface erosion that may be anticipated in a
'E. M. Shipley, personal communication, 1968.

nominal descent. For the soil model considered,
Hutton found that erosion would begin during a
vertical descent to the surface when the exit
plane of the DPS engine nozzle was approximately 25 ft above the surface. Hutton also
found that following a vertical descent, the final
erosional crater that would develop beneath the
engine after landing and engine shutdown would
be approximately 3 to 4 in. deep and 5 to 6 ft
in diameter. This erosional crater formed by the
flow of exhaust gases over the lunar surface
would be ring shaped, and the maximum crater
depth would occur some distance from the center
of the crater. The effect of the blowing surface
material on the visibility from the LM was also
examined.
By considering the lunar soil to be a medium
that is permeable to gas flow and has a permeability in the range appropriate for the grain size
of the lunar soil model material and by ignoring
the erosion mechanism, Scott and KO (ref. 4 1 3 )
examined the mechanics of compressible gas
flow through the soil medium under lunar surface conditions. On analysis of the Surveyor test
results and of postflight tests, scaled to the LM,
Scott and KO found that a vertical descent (or
steady engine firing in one position) followed by
a rapid shutdown of the engine could give rise
to gas pressures inside the soil that would exceed
the lunar weight of the soil overburden. Thus,
shutdown could be followed by a venting of the
gas through the surface soil, accompanied by
upward ejection of the surface soil. The extent
and amount of soil removed by such explosive
outgassing depend, for any given soil and engine,
considerably upon the flightpath and the engineshutdown pressure transients. A slow vertical descent and a rapid decay at shutdown would
produce the largest quantity of ejected soil
material.
Postulated Soil Behavior During Lunar Surface
Extravehicular Activity

Calculations based upon the adopted lunar
soil model indicated that during the lunar surface extravehicular activities (EVA), the astronauts' boots should not sink more than approximately 1 to 2 in. into the lunar surface if the
lunar soil extended to a depth of a few inches
to several feet. Traction on the lunar surface was

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

anticipated to be good. No difficulties in obtaining surface soil samples, driving core tubes, or
installing staffs in the ground were expected if
the soil was sufficiently deep. Mobility problems
might be expected only if an astronaut attempted
to descend or ascend crater walls with slope
angles greater than approximately 15'.
Data Sources for the Investigation

The Soil Mechanics Investigation was included
at a late phase of the Apollo 1 mission planning;
1
consequently, the main guideline given to the
investigator team was that no special soil mechanics testing or sampling devices were to be
added to the hardware already planned for the
mission. Accordingly, the following were the
main sources from which soil mechanics data
could be extracted:
( 1) Real-time astronaui observations, descriptions, and comments during the mission
( 2 ) Real-time television during the lunar surface EVA
( 3 ) Sequence camera, still camera, and closeup stereoscopic camera photography
( 4 ) Spacecraft flight mechanics telemetry
data
( 5 ) Various objects of known geometry and
dead weight that came in contact with the lunar
surface during the mission and subjected the lunar
soil to either a static or dynamic loading; such
objects included the LM, the astronauts, and
the Early Apollo Scientific Experiments Package
(EASEP) instrument units
( 6 ) The Apollo lunar handtools
(7) Various poles and shafts inserted into the
lunar surface in the course of the EVA, including
the contingency sampler handle, the Solar Wind
Composition ( SWC ) experiment staff, the flagpole, and the core tubes
( 8 ) Astronaut technical, photographic, and
scientific debriefings
( 9 ) Preliminary examination of Earth-returned lunar soil and rock samples at the Lunar
Receiving Laboratory ( LRL )
Figure 41 shows the LM footpad geometry
and the strut force-stroking characteristics. If the
LM rests on a level lunar surface and the LM
weight is equally distributed among the four
footpads, each footpad exerts a static vertical

87

force of approximately 700 lb on the lunar surface.
Figure 4 2 shows the configuration of the
astronaut boot sole. In lunar gravity, the weight
of the suited astronaut is approximately 64 lb.
The area of a flat boot sole, not considering the
ribs of the sole, is approximately 65 in.2
Because the astronauts were essential in conducting the investigation and providing real-time
evaluation, especially with regard to unexpected
results, special effort was made to delineate, during astronaut training, simple tasks and observations yielding meaningful soil mechanics information, as well as expected behavior of lunar
soil under various loading conditions.
The EASEP instrument units are shown in
figures 4 3 and 4 4 . In lunar gravity, the weights
of the Laser Ranging Retroreflector (LRRR)
and the Passive Seismic Experiment Package
(PSEP) are 8.7 and 18.7 lb, respectively. The
bearing areas of the pallets on which these two
instrument packages rest are 708.5 and 732.1 in.2,
respectively. The Apollo lunar handtools are
shown in figure 4 5 . These tools are described
in detail in the report concerning lunar geology.
The bottom sections of the shafts mentioned in
item 7 of the list of soil mechanics data sources
are shown in figures 4 6 to 4 9 .
In addition to the data obtained from the
Apollo 1 mission, preflight data were available
1
from simulation studies performed by the investigator team on soils having physical and mechanical characteristics similar to those indicated
by the results obtained from the Surveyor missions. These test results have been documented
and reports are being prepared by N. C. Costes
et al. (George C. Marshall Space Flight Center),
J. K. Mitchell et al. (University of California,
Berkeley), and R. F. Scott and T. D. Lu (California Institute of Technology, Pasadena). In
addition to laboratory tests performed to determine the basic mechanical properties and physical characteristics of the simulated lunar soil,
an effort was made to ascertain the behavior of
the material under conditions expected during
EVA. These conditions included the development
of footprints by standing or walking astronauts,
scooping, sampling, or penetrating the soil with
shafts and Apollo lunar handtool mockups. Figure 4 l O ( a ) shows a simulation test. Figure

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

Load

1

Load-stroke curves

7

9500 lb

i
I

I

4500 Ib

I

0

I Primary
I
I
I

-

10"

-Y

-

C

32"

Stroke

&
Forward

+Y

G?

View looking down

View looking cbwnlright side

FIGURE -Lunar module footpad geometry and load-stroke curves for the primary and
4-1.
secondary struts.

P l O ( b ) shows astronaut bootprints developed
under essentially static loading conditions, and
figure 4-lO(c) shows astronaut bootprints developed under loading of the same magnitude applied in a manner simulating an astronaut walking. From such tests, inferences were made on
the material behavior of the lunar soil during

EVA, taking into account the effect of lunar
gravity. The results appear to agree reasonably
well with the behavior of the material actually
observed during the EVA. Based on the current
data, postflight terrestrial simulations are planned
to gain further insight into the physical characteristics and mechanical behavior of lunar surface materials.

89

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

FIGURE - Astronaut Aldrin de4-2.
scending from the LM. Note the
configuration of the astronaut boot
sole. ( NASA AS 11-40-5866 )

FIGURE - Laser Ranging Retro4-3.
reflector experimc:nt. (NASA AS1140-5952 )

90

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE 4-4. - Astronaut Aldrin deploying the PSEP. (NASA AS1140-5946)

FIGURE 4-5. - Apollo lunar handtools. Pictured from left to right
are the hammer, the gnomon,
tongs, the extension handle, and
a scoop. (LRL photograph S-6931860)

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

FIGURE - Contingency sampler, dimensions are given in inches.
4-6.

Tolerance on outer diameter

Outer dimensions of SWC
(launch configuration)
All dimensions are given i n inches
Tolerances i f not specified otherwise
are ? 0.030 inch
Approximate weight is 435 g (0.96 Ib)

FIGURE - Staff of the SWC experiment.
4-7.

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
Total length of the flagpole i s 92.625 inches
(length includes the top of the bracket) and the 0.125 collar
Length of horizontal section lunextended) is 47 inches
Flag dimensions are 36 by 61 inches

FIGURE
4-8. - The lower section of the flagpole.

Total weight of the flag and the flagpole i s 1.0 pound 14.125
ounces
Surface i s g r i t blasted to a "normal" finish, as
measured by the Apollo l u n a r handtool g r i t
blast comparator gage s i n 1001

1-1.31-1
dia

1

1

2

.

5

3

5

4

T

.777

fi

Shell core holder (2)

Band

FIGURE - Core-tube sampler and bit used on the Apollo 11 mission, dimensions are
4-9.
given in inches.

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

93

FIGURE - Simulation test. ( a ) Astronaut bootprint
4-10.
test on simulated lunar soil. ( b ) Astronaut bootprint
on simulated lunar soil developed under action of
essentially static load. ( c ) Astronaut bootprint on simulated lunar soil under action of load of same magnitude as in figure 10(b). Load is applied in a manner
simulating a walking astronaut.

Soil Mechanics Data Obtained During the
Terminal Stages of L Descent and
M
Touchdown
Erosion and Visibility

According to discussions of soil properties
observed during EVA and obtained from LRL
tests, the mechanical behavior of the lunar surface material appears to resemble the behavior
of the soil at the Surveyor equatorial landing
sites. However, the depth of granular material
appears to be variable. The granular material extends from a depth as small as 2 in. over bedrock
or rock fragments at some locations to greater
depths elsewhere within a radius of 80 to 90 f t
around Tranquility Base. The observations of
exhaust gas erosion and footpad penetrations
must be interpreted in light of this variable soil
profile and the motion of the LM during the ter-

minal stages of descent. This discussion will be
tied to the astronauts' comments while on the
Moon, returning to Earth, and during debriefing.2 Information was also obtained from spacecraft telemetry, the sequence-camera photographs taken during descent, and the still photographs taken during EVA.
From raw spacecraft telemetry, which was received at 2-sec intervals, the horizontal velocity,
the vertical velocity, and the altitude of the LM
have been obtained and plotted in figure 411.
These data may be altered after processing, but
the data are thought to be generally indicative
of the LM movements immediately before touchdown. The two horizontal velocity components
2As taken from the tape-recording transcript, with
amendments. Quotations are numbered for easy reference, and quotation numbers are given in parentheses.

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

94

When lunar module is on the surface,
the altimeter indicates 10-ft altitude
3

2

-5

"
-

a
U -

-

.4
.

a
U

4"r

a.- 3
U

1 s

--2
>
m

.u
I

.
=-

5
z

'-

0

14

18

22
26
M
34
Time, 10245, g. e. t.

38

5

N
.lp

+-

-0

-1

42

FIGURE
4-11. - Descent of the LM: altitude and velocities versus time.

data points and by the fact that the telemetry
reading made immediately before touchdown is
successively repeated after touchdown. However,
if 102:45:42 g.e.t. is taken to be the touchdown
time, the spacecraft had a relatively low vertical
velocity of approximately 1 fps at touchdown
and a high lateral velocity between 3 and 4 fps,
compared to nominal values of 3 and 0 fps, respectively. From the photographs taken of the
footpads and contact probes following touchdown (figs. P 1 3 ( a ) and 4-13(b) ), it appears
that the lateral velocity was to the left of the
spacecraft or in the negative y-direction, slightly
southeast.
During descent, the following comment (quotation 1) was made: "Forward . . . forward 40 ft,
down 2%, picking up some dust." During the
scientific debriefing, Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong qualified the in-flight remark by observing
that he noticed "substantial haziness" at approximately 100 ft. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.,
said he first "saw evidence of disturbed material
at about 240 ft." On the Moon (at 110:39 g.e.t.),
Astronaut Aldrin made the following observations ( quotation 2) :
There's one picture taken at the right rear of
the spacecraft looking at the skirt of the descent
stage. A slight darkening of the surface color a rather minimum amount of radiating or etching away or erosion of the surface, even though,
on descent, both of us remarked that we could
see a large amount of very fine dust particles
moving out.

14
10
I
110 100

0

I
90

I
80

I

I

I

70 60 50 40
H~vizontal
distance, ft

I

M

I
20

I
10

I
0

FIGURE - Descent of the LM: altitude versus hor4-12.
izontal distance.

are not given separately. This information has
been plotted in a different form in figure 4 1 2
to show the vertical trace of the flightpath. From
figures 411 and 4 1 2 , the actual touchdown time
of the LM footpads, not the LM probes, has been
determined to be 102:45:42 g.e.t. (4: 17:42
e.d.t.), although selection of the time is complicated by the relatively long interval between

From these remarks, the first observations of surface erosion appear to have been made when the
footpads were at an altitude of approximately
~90 to 240 ft above the surface. (The altimeter
records 10 ft when the spacecraft is on the surface.) From the sequence-camera film, the first
visible surface-soil disturbance occurred when
the spacecraft was moving across a crater on the
flightpath. This crater, which is approximately
200 ft from the LM landing site, is the one mentioned in the comment (quotation 3 ) which was
made by Armstrong at 151:41 g.e.t.:

. . . I took a stroll back to a crater behind us
that was maybe 70 or 80 ft in diameter and 12
or 20 ft deep. . . . It had rocks in the bottom.
We were essentially showing no bedrock at least
in the walls of the crater at that depth.

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

The erosion would, of course, be affected by
the surface geometry of the crater. However,
from the telemetry data, the altitude of the LM
above the crater was approximately 100 ft. Quotation 1 presumably indicates a time at which
erosion was strongly developed. The height at
which erosion first became noticeable is greater
than the predicted height (25 ft) at which erosion should become noticeable, if based on the
lunar soil model. Accordingly it is possible that
the material being moved was a surface layer
possessing less cohesion than the underlying
layer (and less cohesion than the lunar soil
model size), unless the initial erosion was
(a)
strongly affected by the crater geometry. On
the other hand, the height at which erosion
became noticeable confirms that the surface material possesses some cohesion because a cohesionless soil of the same size range as the
lunar soil would be moved by the LM exhaust
gas at a much higher elevation. (This greater
elevation would be approximately 1000 ft,
although the astronauts would probably not recognize surface effects at 1000 ft even if erosion
were occurring. )
From figures 411 and P 2 (and the 16-mm
1,
sequence film), descent appears to have stopped
for approximately 10 sec ("flare?") when the
footpads were 9 or 10 ft off the lunar surface.
FIGURE
4-14. - Sequence-camera film frames. ( a ) Frame
The appearance of the ground adjacent to the
from sequence-camera film showing initiation of eroLM at this descent stoppage is shown in figures
sion during LM descent. ( h ) Frame from sequence414(a) and 4-14(b). As shown in these figures,
camera film showing fully cleveloped erosion during
soil transport by the LM DPS engine exhaust is
LM descent.
fully developed, and except for the interruptions
in the flow caused by rocks, the surface is
The distance from the ground zero under the
obscured. During the postflight debriefing, AstroDPS engine nozzle to the farthest point visible
naut Armstrong reported (quotation 4 ) that the
in figure 1 4 ( a ) is several hundred feet. Thereappearance of the surface was "very much like
fore, probably erosion effects and certainly the
looking through a thin ground fog. The visibility
eroded soil extended to much greater distances.
is probably degraded about 75 percent." ArmThe following is a subjective impression of this
strong also noted some difficulty in obtaining a
erosion that was given by Astronaut Aldrin at
visual reference for lateral control of the space151:25 g.e.t. (quotation 5 ) :
craft motion because of the high velocity at
which the particles were moving. Consequently,
I took a number of samples of rocks off the sursome of the comments made by the astronauts
face and several that were just subsurface and
about 15 to 20 f t north of the LM and then I
indicate that the blowing dust was "tran~pare~~t,"
recalled that that area had been probably swept
and other comments give evidence of obscurapretty well by the exhaust of the descent engine.
tion. From the sequence-camera film, the lunar
surface seems to be concealed by the blowing
In the scientific debriefing, the astronauts obdust sheet for the final 20 to 30 sec of descent.
served that the eroded material traveled a great

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

FIGURE
4-15. - Lunar surface under
the DPS engine exhaust nozzle.
( NASA ASll-40-5921)

distance, even to the point of obscuring their
horizon.
The relatively high lateral velocity of the
spacecraft in the few seconds before touchdown
means that erosion was never as fully developed
at one place as would occur under the nominal
vertical descent conditions. Concerning this lateral velocity, the astronauts reported the following:
ALDRIN
(quotation 6 ) : "I wonder if that right
under the engine is where the probe might have
hit."
ALDRIN (quotation 7 ) : "Neil, look at the
minus [y?] strut, the direction of travel there,
traveling from right to left."
ALDRIN(quotation 8 ) : "This one over here
underneath the ascent [descent?] engine where
the probe first hit."

However, some surface effects were visible
after touchdown as is evident by the following
remarks:
ARMSTRONG
(quotation 9 ) : "The descent engine did not leave a crater of any size. There's
about 1-ft clearance on the ground. We're

essentially on a very level place here. I can see
some evidence of rays emanating from the
descent engine, but very insignificant amount."
ALDRIN (quotation 10) : "There's no crater
there at all from the engine."
ARMSTRONG a t 110:39 g.e.t. ) (quotation
(
1 1 ) : "There's no evidence of problem underneath the LM due to engine exhaust or drainage of any kind."

The amount of observed erosion seems to have
been very small. Quotation 9 mentions that the
height of the DPS engine nozzle from the lunar
surface was approximately 1 ft. To better estimate the height of the engine nozzle above the
lunar surface, a measurement of the shadow
length on the surface of spacecraft components
(including the rocket engine bell) was made
from the photographs taken by the astronauts.
From this measurement, the height of the engine
nozzle above the lunar surface was estimated to
be 18 to 20 in. For the distance which the shock
absorbers of the landing legs are estimated to
have stroked (discussed later), the distance
from the nozzle to a level, rigid lunar surface is
considered to be approximately 17 in. Because

98

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

the footpads penetrated approximately 1 to 3 in.
into the lunar surface, the nozzle height above
an undisturbed, level lunar surface would be
14 to 16 in. An observed height of approximately
1 ft would indicate that the lunar surface below
the nozzle was 2 to 4 in. higher than a level lunar
surface. However, the estimated height of 18 to
20 in. can be interpreted to mean that 4 to 6 in. of
erosion had occurred. The lunar surface may not,
however, have been level at this location before
the landing. Figure 4-15 shows the surface in
the vicinity of the nozzle. From the photograph,
it is apparent that some soil must have been
removed by the exhaust gas.
Confirmation of this removal might be inferred
from the following remark made by Astronaut
Armstrong on the small depth of penetration of
his boots near the LM footpad ( a t 109:24:20
g.e.t.) (quotation 12) :
The surface is fine and powdery. I can kick it
up loosely with my toe. It does adhere in fine
layers like powdered charcoal to the sole and
insides of my boots. I only go in a small fraction
of an inch -maybe an eighth of an inch, but
I can see the footprints of my boots and the
treads in the fine sandy particles.

The Surveyor spacecraft landings demonstrated that, although the lunar surface and the
underlying lunar soil are dark, the lunar surface
is lighter in color than the underlying soil. Thus,
any disturbance of the surface is manifested by
a dark appearance of the disturbed area. Quotation 2, quotation 9, and the following quotation
indicate that the descent engine caused some
disturbance.
CAPCOM ( a t 114:21 g.e.t., with the astronauts inside the LM after EVA) (quotation
13) : "Next topic here relates to the rays which
[luminate?] from the DPS engine burning area.
We were wondering if the rays [luminating?]
from the -beneath the engine are any darker
or lighter than the surrounding surface."
TRANQUILITY
BASE( quotation 14) : "The ones
that I saw back in the back end of the spacecraft appeared to be a good bit darker, and of
course, viewed from the aft end, well, they did
have the Sun shining directly on them. It
seemed as though the material had been baked
somewhat - and also scattered in a radially
outward direction, but in that particular area,
this feature didn't extend more than about 2,
maybe 3 ft from the skirt of the engine. I

'

wouldn't say it was necessarily material that
had been uncovered. I think some of the material might have been baked. . . . Now, in other
areas, before we started traveling around out
front, why we could see that small erosion had
taken place in a radially outward direction, but
it had left no significant mark on the surface,
other than just having eroded it away. Now it
was different right under the skirt itself. It
seems as though the surface had been baked in
a streak fashion . . . but that didn't extend very
far."

Erosion rays appear in figure 4 1 5 . It is also
observed in figures 4-15 and 4-16 that the -Y
footpad probe touched the surface under the
DPS engine (quotations 6 and 8), approximately
10 to 12 ft from the final footpad location. Because the probe is approximately 5 ft long, a
general lateral to vertical velocity ratio of 2:l or
2.5:l is confirmed. However, a point of interest
is that the trench left by the -Y probe near the
engine is substantially wider and deeper than is
the probe or the mark left by the -Y probe near
the footpad. It is concluded that the first disturbance of the soil by the probe, which was followed by engine exhaust impingement on the
soil, weakened the soil and permitted more erosion to occur in the vicinity of the first contact
of the probe. An indication of exhaust-flow channeling in the trench made by the probe exists.
None of the grooves left by the other probes has
this appearance; grooves left by other probes are
generally of uniform width and uniform depth.
The combination of the lateral component of
the LM velocity in the few seconds before touchdown and before the engine shutdown transient
probably caused little pressurizing of the soil by
the exhaust gas in any specific area. Postshutdown gas-venting effects from the soil would
therefore be expected to be minimal. Quotation
1 indicates that the astronauts did not observe
1
any gas-venting effects during EVA, and Astronaut Aldrin made the following comment (quotation 15) :
It was reported beforehand that we would probably see an outgassing from the surface after
actual engine shutdown, but, as I recall, I was
unable to verify that.

However, in an examination of the sequencecamera film, although there is difficulty in corre-

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

FIGURE
4-16. - The
( NAS A AS-11-40

ootpad.

lating events on the film with spacecraft events,
such as engine shutdown, a change in the erosion
pattern appears to occur at approximately the
same time as engine shutdown. Figures 4-17(a)
and 4 1 7 ( b ) , from the last few frames in the
film, show this transient effect, which may be
caused by either a change in the engine behavior

(a)

99

or by an outgassing effect. In figure 4-15 (in the
lower right corner and in the bottom of the photograph), numerous fractures appear in the lunar
surface in the region that was disturbed by DPS
engine exhaust. Because the firing of a rocket
engine against a slightly cohesive soil in a vacuum results in a "plucking type of erosion in

FIGURE
4-17. L TWO of last few frames from the sequence camera at Lh4 touchdown.

(b)

100

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

which soil chunks are plucked out of the surface
and ejected (ref. 4 1 4 ) , these fractures could be
an indication of incipient erosion of this type of
plucking erosion. In addition, venting of the exhaust gases from the soil surface after engine
shutdown also causes removal of the soil in
chunks or lumps when the soil is cohesive; therefore, the cracks may be evidence of venting.
Astronaut Aldrin also remarked after touchdown
that he observed some rocks that were fractured,
possibly from the DPS engine exhaust.
Because the rocks returned have been found
to vary from being moderately hard to fracture
to being hard to fracture, it would seem unlikely
that any rock fragments were broken by the DPS
engine exhaust effects. Aldrin probably observed
soil clods or chunks that were removed by the
exhaust stream. It is not possible at present to
determine the cause of the fracturing.
During ascent from the lunar surface, the LM
descent stage is left, allowing the ascent engine
exhaust to impinge on the descent stage first. Soil
erosion is, therefore, minimized until the ascent
stage has reached an altitude that will allow the
exhaust to impinge on the lunar surface. Apparently little or no erosion took place during the
ascent, as evidenced by the following exchange:
CAPCOM (quotation 1 6 ) : "Did you notice
-was there any indication of any dust cloud
as you lifted off? Over."
AR~XSTRONG
(quotation 17) : "Not very much.
There was quite a bit of Kaptona and parts of
the LM went out in all directions and usually
in the same distance as far as I can tell, hut I
can't remember seeing anything of a dust cloud."

In addition, the solar panels and the dust detector on the PSEP equipment, which were situated approximately 60 ft from the LM, showed
no signs of degradation from the lunar soil that
was blown away during the ascent.
Touchdown a n d Penetration

The low vertical velocity and the high lateral
velocity of the LM at touchdown resulted in
lower penetrations of the footpads into the lunar
surface and less stroking of the shock absorbers
than would be expected for a nominal landing.
3Kapton is an insulating material that was used in the
construction of the LM.

With respect to footpad penetration, the astronauts made several comments.
ARMSTRONG
(quotation 18): "I'm at the foot
of the ladder. The LM footpads are only depressed in the surface about 1 or 2 in."
ARMSTRONGt 110:39 g.e.t. ) ( quotation 19) :
(a
"I don't note any abnormalities in the LM. The
pads seem to be in good shape."
ALDRIN(quotation 20) : "It's very surprising,
the surprising lack of penetration of all four of
the footpads. I'd say if we were to try and determine just how far helow the surface they would
have penetrated, you'd measure 2 or 3 in.,
wouldn't you say, Neil?"
ALDRIN( a t 110:50 g.e.t. ) (quotation 21 ) :
"We are back at the -Z strut now, The stereopair we are taking illustrate [the] very little
force at impact we actually had."

From these comments, it is apparent that the
range of footpad penetrations was 1 to 3 in. into
the lunar material that remained after most of
the DPS engine erosion of the surface had
occurred. This range is confirmed by the depths
of penetration visible in figures 4 1 3 ( a ) and
&13(b). In these photographs, it also appears
that some soil may have been deposited against
the footpad-to-ground contact region as a result
of rocket engine erosion after touchdown.
Alternatively, the soil that was plowed up by the
footpad in its lateral motion may have been
eroded by the DPS engine exhaust after touchdown.
The descent ladder on the LM is attached to
the fixed portion of the landing gear, and the
footpad, by compressing the shock absorber, can
move with respect to the ladder. This movement
decreases the distance from the bottom step of
the ladder to the footpad. With no compression
of the shock absorber, the distance is approximately 3 ft. The astronauts' remarks show that
hardly any stroking of either the primary or the
secondary shock-absorbing struts occurred.
ARMSTRONGt 109:20 g.e.t. ) (quotation 22) :
(a
It's not even collapsed too far, but it's adequate
to get hack up . . . it takes a pretty good little
jump."
ARMSTRONG
( quotation 23) : "That's a good
step. About a 3 footer."
CAPCOM (quotation 24): "Can you estimate the stroke of the primary and secondary
struts?"
TRANQUILITY
BASE (quotation 25): "All the

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

101

FIGURE
4-18. - Primary strut and
secol~ d a r ystrut of the +Y footpad
after touchdown. ( NA,SA AS11-405919I )

struts are about equally stroked and the height
from the ground to the first step is about 3 ft
or maybe 3% ft."

From figure 418, the stroking of the primary
shock can be estimated to be approximately 0
to 1in.
It is apparent, therefore, that the astronauts
achieved an almost static landing on the lunar
surface with regard to the landing gear. For the
vertical load of approximately 700 lb on each
LM footpad acting statically on a circular
loaded area resting on a Surveyor soil model
several feet deep, the radius of the contact
area would be approximately 9 in. With this
contact area, the required penetration of the
spherical footpad into a lunar surface consisting of the lunar soil model material previously
described is approximately 2.5 to 3 in., which is
close to the maximum penetration that was
observed. Lesser penetrations may be because of
the presence of rock fragments or stronger
material below the surface.

Soil Mechanics Observations During the EVA
The surface is fine and powdery. I can kick
it up loosely with my toe. I t does adhere in
fine layers like powdered charcoal to the sole
and insides of my boots. I only go in a small
fraction of an inch -maybe an eighth of an
inch, but I can see the footprints of my boots
and the treads in the fine sandy particles.

These observations, made by Astronaut Annstrong immediately after his first step onto the
surface of the Moon, provided the first "ground
t r u t h data against which previous conclusions
concerning the mechanical properties of lunar
surface materials could be examined. During the
2 hr of EVA, additional information became
K
available that can be extracted from the descriptions and comments of the astronauts, television
photography, still-camera and sequence-camera
photography, returned samples, and postflight
simulations.
A more detailed account of the lunar surface
characteristics as deduced from lunar surface

102

APOLLO 1 PRELIMIN'ARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

EVA is given in the following sections of this
report.
General Characteristics of the Landing Site

The LM landed in a field of small, elongate, and
circular craters located at 0.67O N and 23.4g0 E;
a point approximately 130 m north and 600 m
west of West Crater, a relatively fresh, sharprimmed ray crater that is approximately 300 m
in diameter. The crater is surrounded by ejecta
containing blocks ranging to more than 3 m in
size and extending 100 to 200 m from the crater
rim. Several hundred feet to the right of the LM,
in a northerly direction, there is a boulder field
with boulders a meter or larger in size. A hill was
estimated to be from ?4 to 1mile west of the LM.
The LM attitude on the surface was tilted to
the east 4.S0 from the vertical and yawed left
(to the south) approximately 13O. The immediate region around the LM was relatively free
of rocks and was covered with craters varying
from approximately 100 ft to less than 1 ft in
diameter. Figure 4 1 9 is a plan view of the landing site indicating major crater locations, other
topographical features, and astronaut activities.
Figure 4 3 0 is a photographic mosaic showing a
panoramic view of the landing site.
Although photographs show the surface at the
landing site to be relatively smooth, the realtime impression of the crewmen was that the
site was very rough with many slopes, holes, and
ridges, and that the general topography consisted of undulations 1m or larger in amplitude.
Further conclusions regarding the lunar terrain
roughness characteristics at the landing site
await the construction of detailed topographic
maps.
Description of the Surface Material

The ground mass at the Apollo 1 LM landing
1
site is a fine-grained, granular material, consisting of bulky grains in the silt to fine-sand particle
size range. Larger rock particles, to 4 ft in size
and varying in shape and type, were distributed
throughout this material. Some of the rocks were
lying on top of the surface, others were partially
buried, and others were partially exposed with
the top part of the rock flat with the surface. The
only evidence of possible bedrock was in West

Crater. On the basis of observations of craters,
the astronauts reported absence of layering in
the subsurface material. On the surface, local
variations in coarse particle sizes did seem to
exist.
The color of the returned fine-grained material
was medium-dark-gray (N-3 to N-4 on the Geological Society of America ( GSA) color scale).
However, on the lunar surface, the color and
brightness of the material appeared to change
with the Sun angle and with the viewing angle. At
higher Sun angles, the color of the material was
toward the brown end of the spectrum, whereas
at low Sun angles, the color of the material was
toward the slate-gray end of the spectrum. The
down-Sun region was extremely bright and appeared to be light tan, whereas when the astronauts proceeded back toward the cross-Sun region, the brightness of the surface diminished,
the surface color began to fade, and the material
began to appear more grayish-cocoa. In the
shadow, the lunar surface appeared to be very
dark. Although the astronauts were able to see
into the shadow, visibility was low. Regions disturbed by the spacecraft landing and the astronaut activities were considerably darker than the
undisturbed area, as may be seen in figure P21.
The degree of darkening that developed as a
result of disturbance appears to be a function of
the phase angle; i.e., angle between the Sun, the
point being observed, and the observer. It has
not yet been established conclusively whether
this darkening is caused by a change in surface
texture; i.e., particle sizes and roughness, as a
result of disturbance, or because the material
underlying a thin surface layer is actually darker.
A similar darkening phenomenon was observed
at the Surveyor landing sites and is discussed in
detail in the Surveyor reports.
The fine-grained surface material had a powdery appearance and was easily kicked free as
the astronauts moved on the surface. The particles moved along ballistic trajectories according
to a definite pattern that seemed to depend on
the angle of impact of the boot with the lunar
surface. A small amount of material landed in a
linear pattern, but most of the material landed in
regions that were generally radially away from
the boots. Kicking at the same angle with different forces did not seem to make too great a

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

FIGURE
4-19. - Preliminary traverse map of the Apollo 11 LM landing site.

difference in extending the pattern. The distribution of particles that struck the surface appeared to be uniform, and, apparently, the mate-

rial did not move in its finest particulate size, but
tended to form clods approximately 5 to 10 mm
in size. As expected, and as was the situation

104

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE4-20. - Photo mosaic showing the panorama of the landing site.

FIGURE
4-21. -Region in the vicinity of Tranquility Base showing the darker region that has
been disturbed by astronaut activities and the lighter colored, undisturbed
region. ( NASA AS1 1-37-5516)

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

105

with the surface soil erosion caused by the DPS
engine exhaust, kicking of the surface material
did not leave a residual, lingering dust cloud to
settle slowly to the surface.
Adhesive Characferisfics

The loose, powdery, fine-grained surface material exhibited adhesive characteristics, as a result
of which the material tended to stick to any
object with which it came into contact, including
the astronauts' boots and spacesuits, the television cable, the Lunar Equipment Conveyor
( L E C ) , and the corners of the solar panels of
the PSEP that came into contact with the surface
during deployment of the seismometer. The largest particles that adhered to the spacesuit were
of fine-sand size. The majority of the particles
fell off the spacesuits when the LM strut was
kicked by the astronauts. However, discoloration
of the fabric meant that some of the particles
must 11al.e continued to adhere. Figure 4-22
shows Astronaut Aldrin and the substantial discoloration of his boots and spacesuit.
Adherence of the fine, powdery material to
the television cable and the LEC imposed some
operational problems. First, when the television
cable was coated with this dust, the cable
the lunar terrain and was not
discerned by Armstrong who
became entangled in the cable. Second, as the
LEC was operated, the powdery material adhering to it was carried into the spacecraft cabin,
posing a housekeeping problem. As the LEC
went through the pulleys, sufficient fine-grained
material collected in the pulleys so that they

Jj'lcmE
4-21. - Astronaut

&owing bwts and
discoloration causccl by adhering lunar soil. (Enlarrrement from NASA ASll-40-5903 )
-

tended to bind. Armstrong commented, "You
can actually feel the gritty material getting
caught up in the rollers of the pulley." Then the
material that was shaken off came out on the

106

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

downward side of the pulley, and Armstrong
further remarked:
The part of the LEC that was coming down
would rain powder on top of me, the MESA
( Modularized Equipment Stowage Assembly),
and the SRC's ( Sample Return Containers) so
that we all looked like chimney sweeps.

The fine, powdery material also adhered to
lunar rock samples that were brought back to
Earth and left a trace of fine dust that coated the
core tubes that were returned to the LRL. This
material adhesion, however, was not of sufficient
magnitude to offer any resistance to pulling of
objects inserted into the lunar surface, such as
the SWC experiment staff, the flagpole, or the
core tubes.
Slipping of Dust-Covered Objects in Contact
With Each Other

The thin layer of material that adhered to the
soles of the astronauts' boots produced a tendency to slip on the LM ladder after EVA.
Similarly, the powdery coating of the rocks on
the lunar surface was observed to make the
rocks slippery. Study of particle shapes in returned lunar samples has indicated a substantial
proportion of small (*SO pm) spherical particles.
The suggestion has been made that these small
spherical particles might behave in a manner
similar to ball bearings, giving rise to slipping
tendencies. The observed behavior is not unusual, however; a fine terrestrial dust, when confined between two relatively hard surfaces, such
as the astronaut boot and the spacecraft ladder
rung or the astronaut boot and a rock surface,
will also produce the same tendency to slip.
This slipping tendency disappears when a relatively solid body is moving in a large mass of
soil, as was the general case with the crew who
experienced no serious mobility problems in
walking, jumping, or loping; and reported that
adequate traction existed for starting, turning,
and stopping. The fact that the soil may contain
small spherical particles is relatively unimportant
with regard to this slipping tendency.
Deformation and Strength Characteristics

The nature of the data provided by the I,M
landing and EVA dictated that analyses of the

strength and the deformation characteristics of
the lunar soil in the vicinity of Tranquility Base
must be primarily descriptive and qualitative
rather than quantitative. This is because no force
or deformation measuring devices were used
during the lunar surface activities. In general,
however, the soil behavior appears to have been
consistent with the behavior that would be expected for a soil having properties characteristic
of the soils studied at the Surveyor equatorial
landing sites. These properties were previously
summarized in this report.
Cohesion

The tendency of the fine-grained material to
form clods indicates that the material possesses a
small, but finite, amount of cohesion. In some
situations, soil clumps could not be distinguished
from rock fragments; however, when these soil
clumps were stepped on, they tended to crumble.
According to the astronauts, such clods of finegrained material constituted about 10 percent of
the blocky material that protruded above the
surface. Other evidence of the slightly cohesive
nature of the lunar soil was given by the following observations:
(I) Initially loose and fluffy material readily
compacted under a load and retained the detail
of a deformed shape, as seen in figures 4-23 to
4 2 5 . As a result, astronaut mobility on previously traversed surfaces was enhanced.
(2) The material could stand unsupported at a
height of at least a few inches on vertical slopes.
(3) During the bulk-sample collection, it was
observed that as the scoop cut through the lunar
soil, the remaining material left a sharp, solid
edge. The material that went into the scoop,
however, crumbled with no evidence of aggregation of the particles.
(4) The holes made by the core tubes appeared to remain intact upon the removal of the
tubes.
(5) When the core tubes were rotated to an
inverted position to keep the core sample from
coming out, there was no tendency for the material to pour out. According to Aldrin when
the core-tube bit was removed, "The surface
seemed to separate again without any tendency
for the material to flow or move." The material

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

FIGURE4-23. - Undisturbed
ASll-40-5876)

lunar

surface.

(NASA

107

FIGURE
4-24.- Same surface as shown in figure 4-23
after having been stepped on by an astronaut. Note
the bulged and cracked region in front and to the
sides of the footprint. (NASA ASll-40-5877)

FIGURE
4-25. - Typical astronaut footprints on the lunar surface in the vicinity of the flagpole.
( Enlargement from NASA AS11-40-5874 )

108

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

collected at the bottom of the core tube had an
appearance similar to that of a moist terrestrial
soil. According to Aldrin:
It was adhering or had the cohesive property that wet sand would have. Once it was separated from the cutter, there was no tendency
at all for it to flake or to flow.
Frictional Characteristics

Although the surface layer behaved as if it
were loose and readily deformable when unconfined, confinement of the soil led to a significant increase in resistance to deformation - a
characteristic of soils deriving a large portion
of their strength from interparticle friction. Relevant material properties can be assessed from the
observations in the following paragraphs.
( 1 ) Relatively small footpad penetrations of 1
to 3 in. were observed. As noted previously, the
landing was essentially static. For penetrations
in the 1- to 3-in. range, the static bearing pressures exerted by the LM on the lunar surface
would be in the range of 2.1 to 0.8 psi. For a
Surveyor soil model with a density of 1.5 g/cc,
a cohesion of 0.1 psi, and a friction angle of 3S0,
the bearing capacity would be 9.1 psi for the LM
footpad contact area, corresponding to a 1-in.
penetration, and 11.5 psi for the LM footpad
contact area, corresponding to a 3-in. penetration. These values are based on the following
equation for ultimate bearing capacity q,lt on
level ground, according to the Terzaghi theory
for incompressible deformation under a strip
footing adjusted for a circular loaded area:
where y is the unit weight of the soil, B is the
diameter of the loaded area, c is the unit cohesion of the soil, D is the depth of the footing,
and N,, N,, and N q are bearing capacity factors
that depend on the angle of internal friction 4
of the soil.
On this basis, the pressures applied by the LM
footpads are seen to be several times less than
the probable ultimate bearing capacity, and,
therefore, the small observed values of footpad
sinkage would be expected. Because of the small
magnitude of lunar gravity, the relatively small
width of the loaded area, and the shallow depth
below the surface at which the load is applied,

the first term of equation ( 4 1 ) accounts for the
greatest portion of the bearing capacity. Thus
the cohesion, in spite of its small value, is a key
characteristic of the lunar soil with regard to the
ability of the soil to support bearing loads. In
the analysis discussed previously, if a unit cohesion of 0.05 psi had been assumed rather than
0.1 psi, the corresponding bearing capacities
would have been reduced to 6.2 and 8.6 psi.
( 2 ) The depth of astronaut footprints was relatively small. Typical footprints shown in figure
4 2 5 correspond to sinkages of the order of onehalf inch. From the known weight of a spacesuited astronaut, approximately 64 Ib in lunar
gravity, and one boot sole area, approximately
65 in.2, the static bearing pressure when the
astronaut weight was applied on one boot was
approximately 1 psi. From the known boot dimensions, 13 in. in length and an average width
of 5%in., the boot may be assumed to behave as a
strip footing. Using the soil model previously
discussed, bearing capacities of 3.8 psi and 6.3
psi are computed for unit cohesions of 0.05 psi
and 0.10 psi, respectively. Again, the applied
stresses are well below the ultimate bearing
capacity. It is important t a recognize that while
the fnst term, the cohesion term, of the bearing
capacity equation (PI) dominates, the value of
N c increases almost exponentially with increases
in the friction angle. Thus, only because the
lunar soil is dominantly frictional in nature can
the cohesion term assume larger values (relatively) for the small unit cohesion.
( 3 ) The bearing strength of the material supporting the PSEP (fig. 4 4 ) appeared to increase
with increased confinement. Both the PSEP and
the Laser Ranging Retroreflector (LRRR) experiment were placed on essentially soft material.
Thus, the crewmen could "jiggle the packages
down and get them reasonably set into the sand."
However, once the PSEP pallet was firmly set
into the lunar soil, the astronauts experienced
considerable difficulty in "getting it to sink down a
little more on one side," in an attempt to change
the slope of the PSEP.
( 4 ) The soft spots encountered during EVA
were observed by both astronauts to be located at
the rims of fresh craters only a few feet in diameter that consisted of loose, very fine-grained
material with essentially no large rock fragments

109

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

FIG^3E 4-26. - Astronaut footprints

at the top edge of a soft-rimmed
cra.ter. (NASA ASll-40-5946)

present. The astronauts commented that if a man
stepped on the ejecta of such craters away from
the crater rim, his foot might sink only a few
inches. However, close to the rim (especially on
the upper edge of the inside slope), where the
material is loose and relatively unconfined, the
foot might sink as much as 6 to 8 in. Astronaut
footprints left at the soft rim of such a crater can
be seen in figure 4 2 6 .
Close examination of this photograph (fig. 4
26) suggests that failure was incipient on the
crater slope adjacent to the deep footprint (closest
to the crater edge in the foreground). The combined weight of the astronaut and the EASEP
package, which he was carrying while walking
by the crater rim, produced a unit bearing pressure of 1.4 psi on one boot area in the lunar gravity field. By using Meyerhof's bearing capacity
factors (ref. 4-15) for foundations on slopes, the
relationships shown in figure 4-27 may be developed for different values of slope angle, friction
angle, and cohesion, and for the boot dimensions
given previously.

25

FIG-

30

35
Fr~ct~on
angle, deg

40

45

4-27. - Bearing capacities under astronaut boot
adjacent to slopes, fol various soil conditions.

110

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

Although the exact slope angle of the crater
wall has not yet been determined, preliminary
estimates indicate the slope angle to be approximately 30'. From figure 4 2 7 , it may be seen
that for a 30° slope angle, a friction angle of 3j0,
and a cohesion of 0.05 psi, failure would be incipient. If the unit cohesion were 0.10 psi, the
bearing capacity should be higher. It should be
noted, however, that the computations have been
based on failure in general shear (incompressible
deformation). In fact, figure 4 2 7 shows that
much of the boot sinkage involves compression;
thus, the estimated bearing capacities are high.
It appears, therefore, the assumed soil properties
account reasonably well for the observed
behavior.
Deformation Characteristics

Although many of the footprints appear to
have resulted from soil compression, in one
instance footprints 2 to 3 in. deep were reported
to be accompanied by bulging of the surrounding
surface and by the formation of cracks extending
to distances of several inches. An example of
this type of soil deformation can be seen in
figure 4-24. Such deformation behavior reflects
the presence of cohesion and deformation dominated by shear rather than by compression. Such
deformation behavior is consistent with the behavior that was observed in some of the bearing
tests conducted by the surface sampler during
the Surveyor 3 and Surveyor 7 missions. In general, the deformation behavior of the lunar surface soil appears to involve both shear and compression.
Subsurface Condifions

Several observations made by the astronauts
during the EVA indicate that the soft surface
material extends only to a depth of a few inches
throughout the Tranquility Base region, as evidenced by either static or dynamic penetration
resistance. Pertinent observations included the
following:
(1)A hard surface was encountered at depths
of 1 to 3 in. during contingency sampling.
Because the contingency sample was taken from
a point close to the LM (i.e., in a location which
probably had been eroded by the DPS engine
exhaust) the original thickness of soft material

may have been greater than the observed thickness.
(2) The bulk sample could be scooped readily
only to depths of 1to 3 in. This sample also was
taken from a region close to the LM.
(3) The flagpole (fig. 4 2 8 ) penetrated approximately 7 in. into the soil. This penetration
was estimated from the distance of the knurled
markings on the pole above the surface. The
first 4 or 5 in. were easy to penetrate. After
these first 4 or 5 in., the resistance to penetration
by the underlying soil increased. However, the
lunar soil apparently did not provide high frictional support along the shaft because upon
ingress into the LM, the astronauts noticed that
the entire unit had rotated about the flagpole
axis and that the flag no longer pointed in the
same direction that it did when originally installed. Whether the flagpole actually tipped
slightly is not clear from the available information. Preliminary analysis of the possibility of
failure similar to that for a laterally loaded pile
indicates that for Surveyor model soil properties,
such a failure should not develop under the magnitude of lateral loading induced by the flag.
(4) The SWC experiment staff (fig. 4 2 9 ) penetrated the surface to a depth of only 5 to 5l/2 in.,
as can be estimated from the knurled markings of
the staff that were visible above the surface.
The staff was reported not to be as stable as
desired, indicating that while resistance to vertical penetration was high, adhesion of the soil
along the shaft was low.
(5) Both core tubes driven into the soil in
the immediate vicinity of the SWC (fig. 4 2 9 )
were easily pushed into the surface to depths of
. 3 to 5 in. Further penetration of only approximately 2 in. was accomplished, and this further
penetration required that the astronaut hammer
as vigorously as possible - to the degree that the
hammer dented the extension handle attached
to the core tube. The core tubes were also reported to remain loose in the soil. They did not
remain in place and could be pulled from the
soil without resistance. The current core-tube
design did not allow for the return of the driving
bit. Examination of the bit and its contents after
driving would have provided valuable information on the nature of the deeper subsurface
material.

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

FIGURE
4-28. - Flagpole penetration of the lunar surface. (NASA ASll-40-5905)

FIGURE4-29. -Astronaut driving core tube near the deployed SWC experiment.

11
1

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

112

(6) Only one observation suggested that the
soft layer in the immediate vicinity of the LM
extended to a depth of more than 6 in. Following collection of the contingency sample, Armstrong commented that he could push the sampler
handle approximately 6 to 8 in. or more into the
surface. It is not clear, however, whether this was
indicative of a deep soft layer. Photographs obtained with the sequence camera indicate that
the sample holder was pushed into the ground
in the same region where the contingency sample
had been collected. Thus, the sampler holder
may have penetrated soil that had been previously loosened by sampling activities.
Discussion

Whether the high resistance to penetration
was due to bedrock, heavily consolidated
soil, or a layer of rubble cannot be determined
from the available data. The astronauts made
the following comments:
Various tools were pushed into the ground to
vario~~s
depths on numerous occasions. Experience was always the same on this wide variety.
On some occasions, rock would be hit and it
was clearly evident when that occurred. When
buried rocks were hit, it was linown that a rock
had been hit. In most other instances, it was
quite different. The tool would just go in, the
force would keep getting higher and higher,
and suddenly it just wouldn't go further.

In discussing the resistance exhibited by the
subsurface material to core-tube driving, both
astronauts excluded the possibility of the core
tubes hitting a rock layer or rock fragments.
Under the impact of successive blows of the
same intensity on the core tube, the corresponding core-tube penetrations appeared to decrease
exponentially. Also, no discontinuity appeared to
exist in the material hardness. The material was

4-1.
TABLE

more compact and more cohesive as the tube
was driven in deeper.
Data obtained with the surface sampler during
the Surveyor 3 and Surveyor 7 missions indicate
that the density and strength of the lunar soil increases with depth. This fact and the fact that
ultimate bearing capacity increases with depth
mean that resistance to penetration should increase with depth of penetration.
From the results of tests on a lunar soil simulant (ground basalt) reported by Mitchell et al.
(final report on NASA contract NAS 8-21432), it
was deduced that the resistance to penetration
by flat-ended rods pushed into the actual lunar
soil should increase by approximately 3 psi for
each inch of penetration if the bulk density of
the soil was the same as that of the core-tube
lunar soil samples returned to Earth. (See following sections.)
Data from simulations by space-suited astronauts under reduced gravity conditions have
established that an astronaut should be able to
exert a downward force of approximately 20 lb
on the lunar surface. By using these data and
by assuming no significant increase in the
strength or density of the lunar soil, table 41
has been prepared to compare values of observed
lunar surface penetrations with predicted values.
In the computations, it has been assumed that
the penetrators, although hollow, became
plugged at a shallow depth of penetration and
subsequently behaved as flat-ended penetrators.
From the results listed in table 4-1, it appears
that the resistance to penetration of the lunar
soil can be accounted for in each instance without postulating the presence of an overconsolidated layer, a cemented layer, or bedrock. It does
not follow, however, that such a layer did not
exist at any or all of the locations. This could

Comparison of observed and predicted lunar surface penetrations

Penetrator

Diameter,
in.

Contingency sampler handle

0.625

0.31

Flagpole

0.875

0.60

Core tube

1.31

1.35

SWC staff

1.34

1.41

Area,
1n.z

Depth o f
penetration,
in.

>6to8

7
3 to 5
5 to 5.5

Predicted penetration
t o 20-Ih resistance,
in.

21.5
11

5
4.75

113

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

only be determined by additional subsurface
exploration; i.e., by digging down several inches.
The high resistance to driving of the core
tubes into the lunar surface to depths greater
than approximately 6 in. cannot be accounted
for by the previous arguments because core-tube
driving involves dynamic penetration. I t may be
noted, however, that the hammer used to drive
the core tube had a mass of only 827.4 g. In addition, Astronaut Aldrin reported that he was unable to strike the core tube as hard as he would
have liked because of the need to steady the tube
with one hand, resulting in a restraint on his
freedom of movement.
Astronaut and Lunar-Roving-Vehicle
Mobility Considerations

As expected, the soil conditions at the landing
area did not pose serious restraints on astronaut
mobility. The lunar surface provided adequate
bearing strength for standing, walking, loping,
and jumping; and sufficient traction for starting,
turning, and stopping. The g - g ltlnar gravity
conditions provided a pleasant environment in
which to work and to maneuver objects. The
astronauts quickly adapted to it. As Aldrin commented,
When your feet are on the surface, you can do
fairly vigorous sideways movements such as
leaning ancl swinging your arm{ without a tendency to bounce yourself up off the surface and
lose your traction.

Walking on the surface tended to compact the
loose, virgin material. Accordingly, crew mobility
was enhanced in previously walked-on regions.
Also, from the appearance of the footprints left
on the surface, the boot ribs appeared to increase
traction.
Confidence in walking on virgin areas was
lowered by two factors: (1) the tendency to slip
when the boot was in contact with dust-covered
rocks and ( 2 ) the variability in the softness characteristics of the lunar surface with little apparent change in the local surface topography. However, these factors did not seriously hinder EVA
or astronaut performance on the lunar smface.
As expected, small, fresh crater walls having
slope angles of 15' or less could be readily negotiated by the astronauts, although it appeared

that going straight down and straight up the
slopes would be preferable to sideways traversing
of these slopes. As Aldrin commented, "The
footing is not secure because of the varying
thickness of unstable material which tends to
slide in an unpredictable fashion."
The material on the rims and the walls of
larger sized craters, with crater-wall slope angles
ranging to approximately 3 5 O , appeared to the
astronauts to be more compact and more stable
than the material on the craters that were traversed. Both astronauts remarked that if time
had permitted, they would have ventured to the
bottoms of these craters.
Commenting on potential problems in the
operation of a lunar roving vehicle on the lunar
surface, the astronauts remarked that the main
concern would not be the consistency and mechanical behavior of the soil, but rather the general topography, and roughness characteristics of
the lunar surface, the human tendency to underestimate distances, and the poor ability to discern the local vertical and to have a good definition of the horizon. All these factors would tend
to restrict the operational speed of a lunar roving
vehicle. However, no insurmountable problems
appear to exist.
Soil Mechanics Observations at the LRL

The Soil Mechanics Team observed the properties of the lunar soil from the documented,
core-tube, bulk, and contingency samples in the
vacuum chamber and in nitrogen cabinets. In
addition, the team performed a specific-gravity
test and determined the density and resistance
to penetration of fine-grained lunar material
placed loosely in a container and also compacted
in layers.
Vacuum Chamber

The outsides of the sample boxes were cleaned,
and tile boxes were then introduced into a special vacuum chamber, which is equipped with a
set of spacesuit-type arm-length gloves that permit a technician to process and handle the
samples under vacuum conditions. The gloves
consist of an inner set and an outer set separated
by low-pressure nitrogen gas ( a t 1to 2 pm) that
continually leaks into the chamber, limiting the

FIGURE
4-30. -Lunar

sample in the vacuum chamber. (LRL photograph S-69-45016)

chamber pressure to approximately loM6 This
T.
pressure is significantly greater than the pressures used in high-vacuum work in the study of
ultraclean soil particles (refs. 4 1 6 to 4 1 9 ) .
However, water and organic molecules have
been carefully eliminated from the system in
order to produce a very clean vacuum.
The first sample box to be opened was the
documented-sample box, which was the second
one packed and sealed on the lunar surface. This
sample box contained the roll of aluminum foil
from the SWC experiment, the two core tubes,
and approximately 20 lunar rocks. Except for the
contents of the core tubes, the only soil in the
documented-sample box was a small amount that
had adhered to the rocks. Figure 4-30 shows
one of these rocks placed on a viewing stand
in the vacuum chamber. The positioning operation has shaken loose some of the soil. Micro-

scopic examination of this soil revealed that it
consisted of two basic sizes. The larger size fraction, comprising only 1 to 2 percent of the sample, consisted of clear, translucent, angular to
subangular smooth particles that were 50 to 200
pm in size. The smaller size fraction consisted
of brown, opaque particles, 2 to 10 pm in size,
which occurred individually and in clusters. Because this soil had adhered to the rock, it is not
necessarily representative of the lunar soil.
Core-Tube Samples

The core-tube samples were especially important because of the likelihood of being less disturbed than the bulk samples, which had been
scooped up with the shovel, and also of retaining
some of the stratigraphic structure, if any, of the
lunar surface. The core tubes were transferred
from the vacuum chamber to the Biological

115

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

Preparation Laboratory (BPL), where they were
placed in one of the stainless-steel cabinets and
surrounded by dry, sterile nitrogen gas at slightly
less than atmospheric pressure. Core tube 2 contained a sample (fig. 4 3 1 ) 2.0 cm in diameter,
13.5 cm in length, and weighing 65.1 g, giving an
average bulk density of 1.54rt0.03 g/cc. The
sample consists of a fine-grained granular material which was remarkably uniform in color,
charcoal-gray with a slight brown tinge. There
were fine reflecting surfaces over approximately
10 percent of the surface area, which gave the
sample a sparkly appearance.
The phenomenon of the color difference between the surface and subsurface material observed by the astronauts and during Surveyor
experiments was not confirmed in the core-tube
samples. The sample had some cohesion and,
therefore, retained its cylindrical shape after the
top half of the split tube had been removed (fig.
4-32). In probing the sample, the action of the
spatula indicated that the soil cohesion was slight,
but was sufficient to hold small clumps of fines together. There appeared to be no variation in
structure with length along the sample. A very
slight color difference between the upper half
and the lower half of the sample suggested some
stratification, but probing revealed no discernible
differences in the mechanical properties of the
two halves.
About half of the sample, a total of 26.73 g,
was removed along the length of the core (fig.
4-32) and placed in a nest of sieves. At this
point it was found that the soil sample did not
consist of fine particles only but contained a
range of particle sizes. The larger particles were
angular, dark, and glassy; some of the larger
particles had vesicles in them. The very fine particles tended to form, break, and re-form lumps
when shaken, as though the soil were slightly
damp (fig. 4-33); although the grain-size distribution curve (fig. 4 3 4 ) indicates a fine, silty
sand with a gravel trace, the aggregation of very
fine particles during sieving may have biased the
results toward the coarser size range.
Core tube 1 (fig. 4-35) contained a smaller
sample, which was 2.0 cm in diameter, 10.0 cm
in length, weighing 52.0 g, and giving an average
bulk density of 1.66 t 0.03 g/cc (fig. 436).
The surface color of the soil was essentially the

same as that of the soil in core tube 2. However,
this sample contained numerous small cracks and
voids that were not taken into account when
computing its average bulk density. The soil was
found to have the same consistency as the sample
in core tube 2. Its grain-size distribution was
determined by sieving, and the results have been
plotted in figure 4 3 4 .
For both core samplers, the core bit was flared
inward at lSO,i.e., in the opposite direction from
most terrestrial samplers. Thus, the soil was
probably deformed considerably during sampling and the measured bulk densities are not
necessarily indicative of the inplace lunar soil
bulk density.
A specific-gravity test was performed on the
material that had been removed from the core
tubes for the sieve analyses. By using a gas comparison pycnometer, the total volume of the
individual grains was determined to be 15.75 cc;
and the total weight was 49.12 g. These values
yield a specific gravity of 3.1, which is considerably higher than the typical value of 2.7 for terrestrial soils. The difference is partially attributed
to the large amount of titanium oxide ( 6 percent)
found in the core-tube soil sample.
Having determined the specific gravity of the
solid particles, the void ratio e of the soil in the
core tubes can be calculated from the following
equation:
e=--G Y ~1
( 4-2
Y

where G is the specific gravity of solids, y, is the
density of water, and y is the bulk density of the
soil.
Substituting in equation ( 4 2 ) the measured
values of G and 7 for the soil samples in core tube
1 and core tube 2, and letting y w = l g/cc, the
void ratio el for the soil in core tube 1 is 0.87,
and the void ratio e z for the soil in core tube 2
is 1.01.
Similarly, the porosity n can be determined
from the following expression:
n=-

e

I+ e

( 4-3 )

By using equation (4-3) the porosity nl of the
soil in core tube 1is 46.5 percent and the porosity
n of the soil in core tube 2 is 50.1 percent.
e

116

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE4-31. -First core tube (core tube 2 ) opened in the Biological Preparation Laboratory. (LRL photograph S-69-45930)

FIGURE
4-32. - Core tubc 2 after dissection. (LRL photograph S-69-45536)

-+
FIGURE4-33. - Soil retained on sieve 140 (0.105 mm)
from core-tube-2 sample. (LRL photograph S-6945107)

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

117

Bulk sample
(less than 1-rnm

Sieve opening. mm

Sand
Sieve no.

Silt

FIGURE
4-34. - Grain-size distribution curves of returned
lunar soil samples.

FIGURE 4-35. - Lunar soil sample contained in core
tube 1. (LRL photograph S-69-45048)

Contingency Sample

The contingency sample was the first surface
sample that was collected on the Moon within
minutes after he stepped off the LM footpad.
Armstrong scooped up the lunar material in fishnet style, discarded the contingency-sampler
handle, folded over the open end of the Teflon
bag, and put the sample bag into a pocket that
was sewn to the outside of his spacesuit. This
sample was given the name contingency sample
because if the mission had been terminated, at
least 500 g of lunar material would have been
returned to Earth.
The contingency-sample bag was not vacuum
sealed, as were the bulk-sample boxes and the
documented-sample boxes, and the bag was exposed to the atmosphere in the LM. However,
the behavior of the soil in the contingency sample was essentially the same as the behavior of
other soil samples.
Although no specific-gravity determinations
were made on the fine-grained material, several
of the rocks were analyzed by the Preliminary
Examination Team by means of a gas comparison
pycnometer. Specific-gravity values ranging from
3.2 to 3.4 were obtained; these were slightly
higher than the value obtained by the Soil Mechanics Team for the specific gravity of the soil
from the core tubes. However, it should be noted
that the volume of the rocks tested varied from

FIGURE
4-36. - Soil particles from the gas reaction sample. (LRL photograph S-69-45181)

2.5 to 5 cc. Previous experience with the type of
pycnometer used has shown that at least 10 cc
are necessary for accurate results; thus, the specific gravity value for the rocks should not b e
considered definitive.
G a s Reacfion Sample

The gas reaction sample consisted of fines
taken from the bottom of the documented-sample
box. This sample was examined microscopically
and revealed the presence of small spherical particles mentioned previously. Although some metallic spheres were found, these particles con-

118

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

sisted primarily of glasses. Selected glass spheres
and mineral grains are shown in figure 4 3 6 ; the
background in the photograph is an aluminum
pan. The lunar soil grain shape can be seen to
vary within a wide range from angular to well
rounded.
Bulk Sample

The bulk sample was collected by Astronaut
Armstrong during EVA after the contingency
sample and prior to collection of the documented
sample. The bulk sample consisted of rock and
soil samples that were scooped up from the lunar
surface and were sealed in a separate vacuum
box. The bulk-sample box remained sealed in
another part of the vacuum chamber in the LRL
while the documented-sample box was opened
and its contents were examined.
While the documented samples were being
processed, a leak developed in one of the vacuum gloves; as a consequence, the bulk-sample
box, which had retained its integrity, was
moved to the cabinets in the Biological Preparation Laboratory. There the bulk sample was
processed in dry, sterile nitrogen at atmospheric
pressure.
The relative ease of working in these cabinets,
and the capability to sustain simultaneous operations by several operators, provided an opportunity to perform simple tests that would have
been impossible to perform in the vacuum chamber. These tests were the determination of the
bulk densities of loosely deposited and compacted
lunar soil as well as the resistance to penetration
of the soil at these densities. Although more extensive testing would have been preferred, under
the circumstances the data are extremely valuable.
Before performing these tests, the Soil Mechanics Team observed the processing of the bulk
sample, beginning with the separation of the
30 lb of rock and soil into three sizes of fractions
(coarser than 10 mm, coarser than 1 mm, and
finer than 1-mm size). As the sample was being
transferred from the box to the set of sieves, using
the scoop, clean, smooth vertical walls approximately 3 in. deep and similar in appearance to
the trenches dug in the lunar surface by Surveyor
3 and Surveyor 7 were cut in the soil mass. This
characteristic behavior indicates the significant

amount of cohesion of the lunar soil, which apparently is unaffected by exposure to nitrogen
gas at atmospheric pressure. However, it should
be noted that the atmosphere in the cabinets is
not pure nitrogen, but contains oxygen, water
vapor, and organic molecules. On the other hand,
because the minerals in the soils and on the
rocks were found by geologists to be remarkably
unweathered, it is, therefore, to be expected that
long-term exposure of the lunar materials to the
atmosphere in the nitrogen cabinets will alter
their properties.
The cohesion and the dark charcoal-gray
brownish color of the lunar soil masked the presence of even sizable rocks within the soil mass.
When a scoopful of soil that appeared to consist
of only fine-grained material was placed on the
10-mm sieve, several fragments approximately 3
cm in size were retained as the soil fell through
the sieve mesh. This masking property may explain why only few rocks appeared to have been
excavated by Surveyor 3 and Surveyor 7. On the
other hand, the lunar soil does not appear to be
significantly adhesive; in most cases, it formed
only a fine dust layer on stainless-steel tools,
although in some instances removal of lunar soil
that had adhered to the sides of the sieve could
only be accomplished by scraping off the soil.
Penetration tests were performed on the soil
fraction with grains finer than 1 mm in size.
The grain-size distribution of this soil is shown
in figure 4 3 4 . The soil was first placed as loosely
as possible into a sample can (with a height of
5.1 cm and a diameter of 8.85 cm), and its bulk
density was determined to be 1.36t0.01 g/cc.
This density corresponds to a void ratio of 1.28
and a porosity of 56 percent (table 4-11). The
minimum density of the lunar soil at % g should
be less than this value, because a looser soil
structure would develop as a result of the adhesive forces acting between the soil particles.
TAELE
4-11. Packing characteristics of loosely
deposited and compacted lunar soil
State

Density,

Loose

1.36?0.01

Compacted

1.28

1.80+0.01

"Calculated from measured specific gravity of 3.1.

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

A simple penetrometer was pushed into the
surface of the loose soil sample five times. In
four tests, the 3i-in.-diameter penetrometer did
not meet with sufficient resistance to compress
the spring. During the fifth test, the back end of
the penetrometer (with an area of 0.416 in.2)
was used and the force and penetration were
measured. Pertinent data are shown in table
4-111 and in figure 4 3 7 . In all five tests the soil
failed in a punching mode, as can be seen in
figure 4 3 8 .
In a second series of tests the soil was placed
in the sample can in several layers and was compacted by rodding, tapping, and compressing. In
this dense state the bulk density of the soil was
determined to be 1.77t0.01 g/cc, corresponding
to a void ratio of 0.75 and a porosity of 42.8 percent. Six penetration tests were conducted, and
the data are shown in table 4-111 and figure 4 3 7 .
The data show a considerable increase in the
penetration resistance of the compacted lunar
soil. In addition, the failure mode was one of
classical, incompressible shear with well-defined
radial and circumferential cracks and heaving
of the surrounding soil (fig. 4 3 9 ) .
The soil was compacted again in an attempt to
achieve a denser state. The resulting bulk density
of the soil was determined to be 1.80t0.01 g/cc,
corresponding to a void ratio of 0.72 and a porosity of 41.8 percent. A two-stage penetration test
was performed which indicated a further increase
in the penetration resistance due to compaction.
Figure 4-39 shows the results of this test.
Preliminary analysis of the penetration data
has revealed the following:
( 1 ) The resistance to penetration of the dense
soil is more than 20 times greater than the resistance to penetration of the loose soil.

Symbol Bulkdensity, glcc

1.01
0

I

10

I

20
Pressure, psi

50

FIGURE
4-37. - Penetration versus resistance to penetration of loose and compacted lunar soil sample.

119

FIGURE4-38. -Penetration of loose lunar soil sample.
( LRL photograph S-69-47484)

FIGURE
4-39. - Penetration of compacted lunar soil
sample. (LRL photograph S-69-47489)

( 2 ) The cohesion for the dense soil ranges
from 0.05 to 0.20 psi.
( 3 ) The cohesion does not appear to be
affected by short-term exposure to nitrogen and
trace amounts of oxygen, water, and organic
materials at atmospheric pressure.
( 4 ) If the lunar surface soil in the LRL nitrogen cabinet is compacted to a density close to
the maximum bulk density of the returned sample,
the soil offers sufficient resistance to penetration
to account for the behavior observed by the
astronauts when they pushed various tools into
the lunar surface material.
Summary and Conclusions

The upper centimeters of the surface material
in the vicinity of Tranquility Base are characterized by a brownish, medium-gray, slightly cohesive granular soil, which is largely composed
of bulky grains in the silt to fine-sand size range.

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

120

TABLE4111. Lunar soil bulk sample. Penetration test results
Test
number

Density,
g/cc

1

1.36

2

1.36

Force,
Ib

3

1.36

4

1.36

<0.41
< .41
< .41
< .41

5

Area,
in.2

0.049
.049
.049
.049

Press~lre,
psi

<8.3
<8.3
<8.3
<8.3

Penetration,
in.

0.25
.77

Pressure-penetration
ratio, psilin.

-

.77

-

.77

-

1.36

.69

.416

1.65

.79

2.1

6

1.77

< .41

.049

<8.29

.32

26.3

7

1.77

1.22

,049

24.8

.67

37.0

8

1.77

.4 1

.049

.25

-

8.29

9

1.77

2.20

,049

44.7

1.00

44.7

10

1.77

1.30

.049

26.5

.83

31.9

11

1.77

8.70

.416

20.7

.67

30.9
60.9
55.9

12(a)

1.80

6.50

.416

15.6

"26

12(b)

1.80

17.95

.416

43.1

".77

" The penetrometer was pushed into the soil to a maximum penetration of 0.25 in.; then it was removed and applied
again at the same place until a total penetration of 0.77 in. was recorded from the original surface of the sample.

Angular to subrounded rock fragments are distributed throughout the area. Some of these
fragments are lying on the surface, some are
partly buried, and some are barely exposed.
The lunar surface is relatively soft to depths
ranging from 5 to 20 cm. The soil can be easily
scooped, offers low resistance to penetration,
and provides low lateral support for staffs, poles,
or core tubes. Beneath this relatively soft surface, the resistance of the material to penetration
increases considerably.
The mechanical behavior of the lunar soil
can be summarized as follows:
Confinement of the loose material leads to a
significant increase in resistance to deformation,
which is a characteristic of soils deriving a large
portion of their strength from interparticle friction.
The soil has a small amount of cohesion. This
was evidenced by the following observations:
( 1 ) The soil has the ability to stand on vertical
slopes and to retain the detail of a deformed
shape. The sidewalls of trenches dug with the
scoop were smooth with sharp edges.
( 2 ) The fine grains stick together and, in some
locations, the astronauts found it difficult to distinguish soil clumps from rock fragments.

( 3 ) The holes made by the core tubes were
left intact upon removal of the tubes.
( 4 ) The material collected at the bottom of
the core tubes did not pour out when the core
bit was unscrewed.
Natural clods of fine-grained material crumbled under the astronauts' boots. This may be
indicative of some cementation between the
grains, although LRL tests indicated that the
soil grains tended to cohere again after being
separated.
Most of the footprints indicate that the low
unit loads of approximately 0.7 N/cm2 (1 psi)
imposed by the astronauts caused compression of
the lunar surface soil, although bulging and
cracking of the soil adjacent to a footprint occurred in a few instances. The latter observation
indicates shearing rather than compressional deformation of the soil.
The lunar surface soil was eroded by the LM
DPS engine; some of the particles removed during this erosion were observed to travel a considerable distance.
Available information indicates that the LM
landing was achieved under essentially staticloading conditions as far as the landing gear was
concerned. The relatively small LM footpad

121

SOIL MECHANICS INVESTIGATION

penetrations of 2.5 to 7.5 cm (1 to 3 in.) correspond to average static-bearing pressures of 0.6
to 1.5 N/cm2 (0.8 to 2.1 psi).
Granular material from the surface adhered
to various objects such as the astronauts' boots
and clothing, the TV cable, and the LEC. It was
possible, however, to jar the sand-sized particles
loose from the boots.
Astronaut mobility was not significantly hampered by the soil conditions encountered; however, irregular topography may pose control
problems in the operation of a roving vehicle
during subsequent lunar missions.
Preliminary visual and microscopic examination at the LRL of the silt-sized particulate
material adhering to and detached from a lunar
rock in the vacuum chamber showed that:
( 1 ) The majority of the individual particles
were dark, opaque, blocky, angular, and fresh in
appearance.
( 2 ) A small proportion of the grains, generally
those grains larger in size (up to fine-sand size),
were clear, translucent, blocky, and angular.
( 3 ) Groups or clumps of particles were
present.
( 4 ) Shards, needles, or filaments were not
observed among the particle shapes.
Visual examination of the material in the core
tubes at the LRL indicated the following:
( I ) The sample was remarkably uniform in its
charcoal-brown color.
( 2 ) The soil had the appearance of being
homogeneous and uniform in grain size.
( 3 ) Small reflecting surfaces gave the sample
a sparkly appearance.
( 4 ) Cohesion was evident in that both coretube samples retained their cylindrical shape.
( 5 ) One sample was much more disturbed in
appearance than the other, and the sample with
the disturbed appearance exhibited fissures and
cracks.
Sieve analyses were performed at the LRL on
the fine-grained material collected with the documented sample, the core tubes, and the bulk
sample. In all three situations, the grain-size distribution was found to be that of a silty-fine sand.
However, the aggregation of individual particles
biased the analysis toward the larger size range.
At the LRL the specific gravity of lunar soil
was measured to be 3.1, which is considerably

higher than the average value of approximately
2.7 for terrestrial soils. Based on the specific
gravity obtained for the lunar soil and on the
measured bulk densities, the void ratio of the
material in core tube 1 is 0.87 and in core
tube 2 is 1.01. The porosities in core tubes 1 and
2 are 46.5 and 50.1 percent, respectively. Because
of the disturbance involved in sampling, these
values may not be representative of the inplace
properties of the material.
At the LRL material finer than the 1-mm size
obtained from the lunar bulk sample was placed
loosely in a container, and the bulk density of
the material was found to be 1.36 g/cc. When
compacted, the bulk density of the lunar soil
was found to be 1.80 g/cc. In the compact state,
the bearing capacity of the material was determined by a small penetrometer. From these tests,
the cohesion of the material was estimated to be
in the range between 0.04 and 0.14 N/cm3 (0.05
and 0.20 psi). These experiments were performed
in the nitrogen atmosphere of the cabinets in the
Biological Preparation Laboratory.

References
KOPAL,Z.: Physics and Astronomy of the Moon.
Academic Press, 1962.
JAFFE,L. D.: Lunar Dust Depth in Mare Cognitum. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 71, no. 4, Feb. 1966,
pp. 1095-1103.
JAFFE, L. D.; and SCOTT,R. F.: Lunar Surface
Strength: Implications of 1,una 9 Landing. Science, vol. 153, July 22, 1966, pp. 407-408.
CHRISTENSEN,
ELMERM.; BATTERSON, A.; et
S.
al.: Lunar Surface Mechanical Properties Surveyor I. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 72, no. 2,
June 15, 1967, pp. 801-813.
CHERKASOV, I.; et al.: Determination of the
I.
Physical and Mechanical Properties of the Lunar
Surface Layer by Means of Luna 13 Automatic
Station. Moon and Planets 11. North-Holland
Publishing Company, 1968, pp. 70-76.
SCOTT,RONALD The Density of the Lunar
F.:
Surface Soil. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 73, no. 16,
Aug. 15, 1968, pp. 5469-5471.
QUAIDE,
WILLIAM and OBERBECK,
L.;
VERNER.:
Thickness Determinations of the Lunar Surface
Layer from Lunar Impact Craters. J. Geophys.
Res., vol. 73, no. 16, Aug. 15, 1968, pp. 52475270.
SCOTT, F.; ancl ROBERSON, I.: Soil MechanR.
F.
ics Surface Sampler: Lunar Surface Tests and
Analyses. Chap. IV of Surveyor I11 Mission

122

4-9.

4-10.

4-11.

4-12.

4-13.

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
Report, Part 11: Science Results, TR32-1177,
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Calif. Inst. Tech.,
June 1, 1967, pp. 69-110.
CHRISTENSEN, M.; et al.: Lunar Surface MeE.
chanical Properties. Chap. IV of Surveyor V
Mission Report, Part 11: Science Results, TR321246, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Calif. Inst.
Tech., Nov. 1, 1967, pp. 43-88.
CHRISTENSEN, M.; et al.: Lunar Surface MeE.
chanical Properties. Surveyor VI Mission Report,
Part 11: Science Results, TR32-1262, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Calif. Inst. Tech., Jan. 10,
1968, pp. 47-107.
SCOTT, F.; and ROBERSON, I.: Soil MechanR.
F.
ics Surface Sampler. Chap. V of Surveyor VII
Mission Report, Part 11: Science Results, TR321264, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Calif. Inst.
Tech., Mar. 15, 1968, pp. 135-185.
HUTTON, E.: LM Soil Erosion and Visibility
R.
Investigations, Part I: Summary Report and
Part 11: Appendix (References). TRW Tech.
Rept. 11176-6060-RO-00, Aug. 13, 1969.
SCOTT,
RONALD and KO, HON YIM: Transient
F.;

4-14.

4-15.
4-16.
4-17.

4-18.
4-19.

Rocket-Engine Gas Flow in Soil. AIAA, vol. 6,
no. 2, Feb. 1968.
S.;
LEONARD EXV.:
LAND,
NORMAN and CLARK,
perimental Investigation of Jet Impingement on
Surfaces of Fine Particles in a Vacuum Environment. NASA TN D-2633, Apr. 1965.
MEYERHOF, G.: The Ultimate Bearing CapacG.
ity of Foundations. Geotechnique, vol. 11, no. 2,
Dec. 1951, pp. 301-330.
HALAJIAN, D.: The Case for a Cohesive Lunar
J.
Surface Model. Rept. no. ADR-04-04-64.2,
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., 1964.
BROMWELL,
LESLIEG.: The Friction of Quartz in
High Vacuum. Research Rept. R66-18, Department of Civil Engineering, Soil Mechanics Division, MIT, May 1966.
RYAN,J. A.: Adhesion of Silicates in Ultrahigh
Vacuum. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 71, no. 18, Sept.
15, 1966, pp. 4413-4425.
NELSON,
JOI-IND.; and VEY,E.: Relative Cleanliness as a Measure of Lunar Soil Strength. J.
Geophys. Res., vol. 73, no. 12, June 15, 1968,
pp. 3747-3764.

5. Preliminary Examinafion of Lunar Samples
This report describes the results of preliminary physical, chemical, and biological analyses
of the lunar material returned from the July 20,
1
1969, Apollo 1 lunar landing at Mare Tranquillitatis. The analyses were performed at the
Lunar Receiving Laboratory (LRL) by the Preliminary Examination Team (PET) consisting
of resident NASA staff members and visiting
scientists. The results of these analyses were
used to plan the allocation and distribution of
the lunar materials to the 142 scientists throughout the world who will conduct detailed studies
of the samples.
The Apollo 1 astronauts collected three
1
separate samples: a contingency sample, a bulk
sample, and a documented sample. The contingency sample, weighing approximately 1 kg,
was collected within 1.5 m of the lunar module
(LM) and consisted of a few rock fragments and
fine materials. The bulk-sample box contained
approximately 14 kg of rocks and fine materials
and was collected within 10 m of the LM. The
documented-sample box contained approximately
6 kg of rocks selected late in the extravehicular
activity (EVA) and two core tubes.
Both the bulk-sample and the documentedsample containers were sealed on the lunar
surface, transferred into the LM, bagged, and
(after rendezvous) transferred into the command
and service module (CSM). The sample containers were removed from the command module (CM) on the carrier Hornet, transferred into
the Mobile Quarantine Facility (MQF) and
placed in a second bag, and (after decontamination) transferred from the MQF into two aircraft that returned the containers to the LRL on
July 25, 1969. The lunar samples in the sample
boxes were brought into the Sample Laboratory
(SL) of the LRL and put into decontamination
chambers, where terrestrial contamination was
removed by a peracetic acid spray.
The biological barrier in the SL is actually a

double barrier. The primary barrier consists of
vacuum chambers and special class 1 1biological
1
cabinets, inside which the samples are handled.
The sealed walls of the building constitute a
secondary barrier. The inside of the Crew Reception Area (CRA) and the SL are operated at a
small negative pressure so that any leakage will
be inward. Similarly, SL primary barrier cabinets
are operated at negative pressure with respect
to the rooms in which they are located. The
biological barriers are two-way barriers that prevent unsterilized lunar material from contaminating the atmosphere of the Earth and prevent terrestrial contaminants from reaching the
samples.
All samples were opened and processed in a
vacuum of 5 X
T (or less) or in a dry nitrogen atmosphere. All handling was done in gloved
cabinets. The documented-sample box was
opened in the vacuum chamber, and the roclcs
were examined, described, photographed,
weighed, and chipped for physical and chemical
analysis and biological testing. The bulk-sample
box, the contingency-sample container, and the
core tubes were opened in a dry nitrogen atmosphere inside one of the special cabinets after
proper determination that no short-term degradation of the sample occurred upon exposure to
oxygen, moist air, and carbon dioxide. Approximately 50 g of the core-tube material and 500 g
of the fines from the bulk box were removed
for biological testing. Most of the remaining
material was stored in a nitrogen atmosphere
inside the biological cabinets; the rest was stored
under vacuum conditions.
Portions of the sample were used for determination of density, of reaction to gas, of mineralogical properties, chemical analysis by optical
emission spectroscopy, total organic carbon analysis, and X-ray diffraction properties in the Physical-Chemical Test Laboratory of the LRL. Rare
gases and volatile organic species were analyzed

124

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

in the Gas Analysis Laboratory. Counting of
short-lived isotopes was performed in the LRL
Radiation Counting Laboratory, a specially
shielded underground laboratory. Magnetic properties and properties of the soil were also measured. The results of these studies are the subject
of this report.
Mineralogy and Petrology

The total weight of the lunar material returned
1
1
by Apollo 1 was 22 kg, of which 1 kg were
rock fragments more than 1 cm in diameter and
1 kg were smaller particulate material. Because
1
the documented sample container was filled by
picking up selected rocks with tongs, the container held a variety of large rocks (total weight
6.0 kg). The total weight of the bulk sample was
14.6 kg.
he-following discussion is based on stereomicroscopic examination of the samples, aided by
random grain counts under the polarizing microscope. Some of the provisional identifications
were reinforced by limited further investigation
with the aid of spindle-stage and X-ray powder
diffraction methods, together with study of thin
sections of two of the crystalline rocks which
became available near the close of the preliminary examination. In spite of the handicap of
an adherent layer of dust, all the rocks were
examined. Only the contingency samples and
small chips taken from the samples in the rock
boxes were free of dust when examined.
The returned lunar material may be divided
into the following four groups:
(1) Type A - fine-grained vesicular crystalline
igneous rock
(2) Type B - medium-grained vuggy crystalline igneous rock
(3) Type C - breccia consisting of small fragments of gray rocks and fine material
(4) Type D - fines
The term "rocks" is applied to fragments larger
than 1cm in diameter; the term "fines" is applied
to fragments smaller than 1 cm in diameter. All
the rocks and many smaller rock fragments show
unearthly surface features (fig. 5-1) that are discussed in the following paragraphs.
The crystalline rocks are volcanic in origin.

FIGURE - Surface pits in breccia.
5-1.

The term 'cvolcanic," as used in this report
implies surface lavas or near-surface igneous
rocks and carries no connotations regarding impact-generated or impact-triggered volcanism
versus volcanism in the common terrestrial sense.
The rocks contain pyrogenic mineral assemblages and gas cavities indicating crystallization
from melts. The major minerals can be assigned
to known rock-forming mineral groups. The
unique chemistry of the magmas has resulted in
mineral ratios unlike those of known terrestrial
volcanic liquids, yet not greatly different from
some terrestrial cumulates, at least in the major
elements.
Twenty crystalline rocks, most of which weigh
more than 50 g, were returned. The largest crystalline rock weighed 919 g. These rocks have
been divided into a fine-grained vesicular type
(type A, fig. 5-2) and a coarser grained vuggy
microgabbroic type (type B, fig. 5 3 ) , but the
rocks may be members of a textural and compositional series. Figures 5-2 and 5-3 illustrate
the two most common types.
A chip from a dark-gray vesicular rock with
subophitic texture (type A) has a bulk density of
approximately 3.4 g/cc. The vesicles range between 1 and 3 mm in diameter, and most of the
vesicles are spherical; however, some are ovate.
Coalescence has modified other vesicles to create
irregularly shaped cavities that are larger than
single vesicles. The vesicles are faced with brilliant reflecting crystals composed of the ground-

PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION OF LUNAR SAMPLES

125

FIGURE - Typical type A crystalline rock. ( a ) Sam5-2.
ple 10022. ( b ) Photomicrograph of sample 10022.

mass minerals. Such vesicles contain no transecting crystals or sublimate minerals. In addition to the spherical vesicles, minor irregularly
shaped cavities (or vugs) exist into which groundmass and accessory minerals project locally. Vugs
tend to take the place of spherical vesicles in the
more coarse-grained rocks; euhedral crystals
projecting into vugs are common.
Preliminary modal analysis of this type A
specimen, recalculated for 15 percent of void
space, yields clinopyroxene, 53 percent; plagioclase, 27 percent; opaques (abundant ilmenite,
perhaps minor troilite, and perhaps native iron),
18 percent; other translucent phases (at least
two), 2 percent; and minor olivine. Notable are
rare grains of olivine showing marginal transformation to clinopyroxene. The olivine grains
are as much as 0.5 mm long, whereas most other
mineral grains range between 0.05 and 0.2 mm
in diameter. In vuggy regions, there is a slight
increase in grain size. Except for the high con-

FIGURE -Typical type B crystalline rocks. ( a ) Sam5-3.
ple 10047. ( b ) Sample 10050.

tent of opaque minerals, the lunar rock resembles some terrestrial olivine-bearing basalts.
Mineral grain and vesicle sizes, shapes, and distribution suggest that the rocks originated near
the top or bottom of a lava flow or lava lake.
Although most of the type A rocks have
smaller vesicles, nine other type A rocks are
similar to the rocks previously described. The
most notable variation among type A rocks is in
olivine content, which ranges from zero in some
rocks to approximately 10 percent in other rocks.
The dark-brownish-gray, speckled type B

126

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

rock (fig. 5-3) has irregular cavities and a bulk
density of approximately 3.2 g/cc. The texture is
granular and in general appearance resembles
the microgabbroic textures of segregation veins
and pods in some terrestrial basalts.
The grain size in type B rocks varies from 0.2
to 3.0 mm. The largest crystals, many of which
are euhedral, project into cavities. Preliminary
modal analysis indicates clinopyroxene, 46 percent; plagioclase, 31 percent; opaques (mainly
ilmenite), 1 percent; low cristobalite, 5 percent;
1
and others, 7 percent. The others include an
unidentified yellow mineral that seems to be
concentrated in vurrnv areas of the rock and a
high-index colorless mineral. Olivine is not present in this rock or in similar rocks.
The crystalline rocks present a series based
on groundmass grain size ranging from approximately 0.1 to 1 mm, with larger crystals (up to
3.0 mm) in vuggy zones of the coarser grained
rocks. Ilmenite seems less abundant, and low
cristobalite seems more abundant in the coarser
grained rocks. In general, the abundance of vugs
increases and the abundance of vesicles decreases
as grain size increases. Olivine is found only in
the finer grained rocks, and the unidentified
vellow phase is found only in the coarser grained
rocks. The three major minerals (clinopyroxene,
calcic plagioclase, and ilmenite) are present in
all the rocks.
The apparently complete absence of hydrous
mineral phases is notable, as is the extremely
fresh appearance of all the crystalline rock interiors, in spite of the microfractures and high
potassium-argon, which suggests that the rocks
are old.
All the breccias examined (type C, fig. 5-4)
are mixtures of fragments of different rock types
and are gray to dark gray, with specks of white,
~ ~ h t - ~ r and , b r o - i ~ h - ~ r a ~rock fragments.
ay
Most breccias are fine grained, with fragments
smaller than 1 cm in diameter; fragments smaller
than 0.5 cm predominate. Only a few fragments
in the breccias are rounded. The fragments consist of either rocks or minerals similar to those
described previously, but have the distinction
that many fragments show a greater population
of closely spaced microfractures and various
degrees of vitrification. In addition, angular
fragments and spherules of glass (which also
"L7,

A

-

(c)
FIGURE - Type C breccia. ( a ) Sample 10019 illus5-4.
trating rounding and glass-lined pits. ( b ) A chip of
sample 10019 illustrating rounding, glass-lined pits,
and lithic fragments. ( c ) A chip of sample 10019
illustrating rounding and lithic fragments.

are characteristic components of the lunar fines)
are present in a wide range of color and refractive indices. In several specimens, vesicular finegrained crystalline rock constitutes a major frac-

PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION OF LUNAR SAMPLES

tion of the larger fragments. In other specimens,
mineral fragments and small fragments of the
coarser microgabbroic type predominate. Although the rock fragments are small, there seems
to be a wider range of variation in modal mineral composition and in shock metamorphism of
the crystalline rock types than is shown by the
large crystalline rock samples returned. Several
minor rock types, one predominantly light gray
and one predominantly pale yellow, occur in
breccia but are not represented among the larger
individual rocks. Some breccias contain crystal
fragments larger than 3 mm across, indicating
the existence of coarser crystalline rocks than
those returned.
The finer fraction of the breccias is gray and
granular in appearance and consists largely of
glass particles (both angular and rounded) and
fragments of birefringent minerals, which are
coated in part with glass or with opaque or finegrained dusty material. The glass particles,
which form most of the matrix, are similar to the
glass of the finer material. Many single glass particles are composed of more than one glass type
and are therefore unlike glass shards of common
terrestrial volcanic processes. Some of the brecc i a ~are transected by vesicular glass veins or
contain pods of glass, either formed in place or
injected along fractures.
The degrees of induration and the histories
of subsequent deformation of the breccias are
varied. While some breccias are poorly consolidated and are soft and friable, others have
coarse layering. Still other breccias have closely
spaced fracture systems and are as hard as (if
not harder than) the hardest of the crystalline
rocks. The breccias and many of the broken
fragments of crystalline rocks in the breccias are
composed of impact ejecta.
Two types of unique surface features occur
on all rocks of the lunar samples: small pits lined
with glass, and glass spatters not necessarily
associated with pits. In addition, the crystalline
rocks show a generally lighter colored surface,
compared to the interior, which appears to be
related to microfracturing of surface crystals.
The diameters of pits average somewhat less
than 1 mm. Diameter-to-depth ratios of the pits
have a range of values, but the ratio is apparently smaller for pits in the breccias than for pits

127

in the crystalline rocks. A few of the rocks examined show pitting on rounded sides but no evident pitting on one (generally flat or irregularly
rough) surface. The glass surfaces in the pits are
bright reflecting and are commonly uneven and
botryoidal. Botryoidal surfaces are more common in pits within breccias than in pits within
crystalline rocks. Raised, glassy rims occur in
greater abundance in surrounding pits within
the breccias. The glass extends beyond some pit
rims. Fractures and rare glass veinlets radiate
from some pits. The pits are presumably caused
by the impact of small particles on the surfaces
of the rocks.
In addition to glassy pits, thin glass crusts
occur that appear to be the result of spattering.
Spatter crusts more than 1 cm in diameter occur
on both breccia and crystalline rock surfaces.
These crusts may be related to nearby impact
events.
The surfaces of the crystalline rocks show
whitish blotches and halos around the glassy
pits. This whitish color is at least partially attributable to intense microfracturing of minerals,
particularly feldspar and pyroxene, and does
not penetrate more than 0.5 to 1.0 mm below the
surface in most of the cross sections examined.
In some crystalline rocks, surface whitening is
so widespread that the whole surface is lighter
in color than the interior. This feature is particularly noticeable in fine-grained roclts, which
are dark gray on freshly broken surfaces.
The most noticeable surface feature of the
rocks is the rounding of one or more edges and
corners. The most striking example of rounding,
and perhaps the most common, is that in which
one side of a rock is nearly flat and the remainder of the surface is rounded. Rounding
appears to be more pronounced in the softer,
more friable breccias than in the crystalline
rocks. The breccias commonly have coarser
grains projecting above the original surface,
which suggests that the finer grains that once
surrounded them have been eroded away. Thus,
the appearance is similar to that of friable sedimentary rocks of a wide range in grain size that
have been sandblasted. Both the rounding and
the detailed surface appearance indicate that an
erosional process has acted on the rocks. The
surface features of several rocks allow conclu-

128

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE5-5. -Sample 10046 illustrating a type B rock
that displays evidence of its original position. The
upper right portion of the sample displays rounding,
glass-lined pits, and a light color. The lower left
portion of the sample displays a sharp angular outline,
few pits, and a dark color. This sample appears to
have been partially buried on the lunar surface with
only the upper right portion exposed.

sions to be made regarding the orientation of
the rock on the lunar surface (fig. 5-5).
Two core samples of material 2 cm in diameter were returned: core tube 1 contained 10 cm
and core tube 2 contained 13.5 cm of material.
The core samples were composed predominantly
of particles in the range of 1mm to 30 pm, with
admixed angular rock fragments, crystal fragments, glass spherules, and aggregates of glass
and lithic fragments in the coarser sized fraction.
When the upper half of the split-tube core liner
was removed, the cylindrical shape of the material was retained perfectly. Both the material in
the tubes and the fines are generally medium
dark gray with a tinge of brown. When prodded
with a small spatula, the material disintegrates
particle by particle or forms extremely fragile
ephemeral units of subangular blocky shapes.
Neither core sample showed obvious grainsize stratification. The core sample taken from
core tube 2 displayed a slightly lighter zone
approximately 6 cm from the top surface. This
zone is 2 to 5 mm thick with a sharp upper
boundary and a gradational lower boundary. In
grain size or texture, the lighter zone is not
megascopically different from the dark material.
Sieve analyses of material from the two core
tubes, a sample from the documented Apollo
lunar surface return container (ALSRC), and a

sample from the bulk ALSRC, are shown in
figure 5-6. These distributions are replicable by
simple dry sieving, but may be biased by an
aggregation of fines. Core tube 1 has a bulk
density of 1.66k0.03 g/cc, and core tube 2 has
a density of 1.54+-0.03 g/cc.
The fines consist chiefly of a variety of glasses,
plagioclase, clinopyroxene, ilmenite, and olivine.
Rare spherules and rounded fragments of nickeliron up to 1 mm in size were observed. The
glass, which constitutes approximately one-half
the material, is of three types: (1) botryoidal,
vesicular, and globular dark-gray fragments;
( 2 ) angular pale or colorless (or more rarely,
brown, yellow, or orange) fragments with a
refraction index ranging from approximately 1.5
to approximately 1.6; and ( 3 ) spheroidal (fig.
5-7), ellipsoidal, dumbbell-shaped, and teardrop-shaped bodies, most of which are smaller
than 0.2 mm and range in color from red to
brown and from green to yellow. Refraction indices range from less than 1.6 to more than 1.8
and are generally higher for the more intensely
colored glass. Material with a refraction index
greater than 1.7 is less common than material
with a lower index. The angular colorless and
pale glass, by far the more abundant type, is in
part turbid or weakly birefringent. Unlike nor100 90 80 -

..
.-

70

-

a
c
,

g 60 a

Documented box.,.

I

2000 1000 500

I

250

I

I

I

I

125 62.5 31.2 15.6 7.8

Grain size.

I

3.9

Bm

FIGURE - Grain-size distribution in the lunar fines.
5-6.

PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION OF LUNAR SAMPLES

FIGURE5-7. - Glass spherules of various colors found
in fine-grained material.

ma1 quenched magma droplets and glasses from
terrestrial volcanic sources, many single glass
particles found in the core samples are inhomogeneous.
Evidence of impact metamorphism exists in
the lunar samples, particularly in the loose, finegrained materials and in the breccias. In contrast, most of the crystalline rocks, although
commonly fractured or crumbly on the surface,
show negligible or weak shock effects in their
interiors. Only a small number show evidence
of strong shock. Crystalline rocks underlying
glass-lined pits are crushed or powdered, but are
not strongly shocked. Such regions range from
limited to wide distribution on the surfaces of
the crystalline rocks.
Many phenomena were observed in the loose
material and in the breccias that indicated that
melting was induced by strong and intense shock.
These phenomena included ( 1) glass dumbbells,
teardrops, and other forms of evolution; ( 2 )
vesicular and flowed glass containing at least
two types of glass; and ( 3 ) nickel-iron spherules.
The abundance of vitrified mineral fragments is
also evidence of moderate to strong shock. Unshocked minerals or lithic fragments are found
in the loose materials and in breccia, but these
fragments are not abundant. Most birefringent
crystal fragments found in the fines display pronounced straight to mosaic undulatory extinction, and several display lamellar microstructures, indicating that these fragments have
encountered weak to strong shock.

129

Evidence of a multiple shock history is provided by fragments of breccia within breccia
and by breccias that contain spherules of glass
from prior impact events and that are splashed
with glass from subsequent impact events. Each
breccia sample contains a wide variety of mineral and lithic fragments of various degrees of
shock, and each sample appears to have a complex history.
Clinopyroxene is present in all of the rock
samples examined. The most abundant variety
is cinnamon brown to resin brown in reflected
light, and pale reddish brown to pinkish brown
in transmitted light, with little or no pleochroism. The appearance of clinopyroxene in the
crystalline rocks is generally stubby prismatic
or anhedral, but sheaflike intergrowths containing feldspar are also present. Several crystals
are strongly zoned from the center outward, as
indicated by an increasing positive optic angle
from near O0 to 50°, together with an increasing refraction index and color intensity. The
determined optical properties of the crystals appear to fit into the pigeonite-augite series and
do not exclude titaniferous varieties. Cinnamonbrown pigeonite in samples of fines was identified by X-ray diffraction.
Olivine from Foss to F075 is a subordinate
phenocrystic constituent of several of the finer
crystalline rocks and occurs sporadically as
crystal fragments in the breccias and dust. Olivine is a clear, pale greenish-yellow color in the
crystalline rocks but may range from greenish
yellow to honey yellow and orange yellow in
the breccias and dust. The presence of olivine
in the crystalline rocks was confirmed by X-ray
diffraction methods.
Plagioclase is also abundant, but is generally
found in a smaller amount than are the ferromagnesian minerals. Plagioclase is indicated by
optical properties to be calcic, between An70
and Anso, with compositional zoning in several
rocks. The appearance of plagioclase is commonly lath and plate shaped, with lamellar
twinning parallel and transverse to the plates.
The presence of calcic plagioclase in the crystalline rocks was confirmed by X-ray diffraction
methods.
Ilmenite, as identified optically and by X-ray
diffraction, is present in relatively large amounts

130

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

in the crystalline rocks, where ilmenite occurs
as plates and well-formed skeletal crystals. 11menite is also common in the breccias and dust
as a constituent of the lithic fragments and as
isolated crystal fragments.
Low cristobalite is present as thin, clear coatings and anhedral crystals. The cristobalite occurs in cavities and fills interstices between
plagioclase plates in several of the coarser crystalline rocks. It is characterized by a crackly surface and complex twinning. Unidentified yellow
transparent crystals occur in cavities interstitial
to the plagioclase crystals. The mineral is a characteristic accessory in several of the more coarsely
crystalline rocks.
Troilite ( tentative identification) occurs in
small amounts in several of the coarser crystalline
rocks as rounded masses in interstices between
plagioclase, clinopyroxene, or ilmenite. Native
iron ( tentative identification ) occurs as scattered blebs up to 10 pm in diameter within the
troilite masses. Several other accessory minerals
are present in crystalline rocks but have not yet
been identified.

Chemistry
Chemical analyses of the rock samples were
made primarily by optical spectrographic methods operated inside the biological barrier. An
instrument with a dispersion of 5.2 Almm was
used. Three separate techniques were used to
determine the chemical composition of the
rocks :
( 1) Determination of silicon, aluminum, iron,
magnesium, sodium, potassium, calcium, titanium, manganese, and chromium, using strontium
as the internal standard
( 2 ) Determination of iron, magnesium, titanium, manganese, chromium, zirconium, nickel,
cobalt, scandium, vanadium, barium, and strontium, using palladium as the internal standard
( 3 ) Determination of lithium, rubidium, cesium, lead, copper, and other volatile elements,
using sodium as the internal standard
The precision of the determinations was +-lo
percent of the amount of an element present in
a rock. Accuracy of the results was controlled by
use of the international rock standard samples
(G-1, W-1, Sy-1, BCR-1, DTS-1, PCC-1, 6 2 ,
AGV-1, and GSP-1) for calibration. Analyzed

terrestrial basaltic rocks (Hawaii and Galapagos ), chondritic meteorites (Forest City and
Leedey), and achondrites (Sioux County and
Johnstown) provided additional calibration
points. All spectrographic line identifications
were checked against individual-element spectra,
in addition to the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology wavelength tables and the U. S.
Bureau of'standards tables.
The spectrographic plates were examined to
establish the presence or absence of all elements that contained spectral lines in the wavelength regions covered. A list of elements that
were not detected in the rock samples is given
in table 5-1.

TABLE
5-1. Elements undetected in rock samples
Element

Cesium
Beryllium
Lanthanum
Neodymium
Hafnium
Niobium
Tantalum
Molybdenum
Tungsten
Rhenium
Rubidium
Rhodium
Palladium
Iridium
Platinum

Detection limits,
pen1

1
3
30
30
50
50
100

5
20
100
10
10
10
50
50

Element

Gold
Zinc
Cadmium
Mercury
Boron
Gadolinium
Indium
Thallium
Germanium
Tin
Lead
Arsenic
Antimony
Bismuth
Tellurium

Detection limits,
P P ~

10
30
10
100
5
10
1
1
5
10
2
100
20
20
100

Line interferences caused by titanium, chromium, and zirconium lines were checked for all
analytical lines. Wavelengths of the several principal lines were checked for those elements that
were not detected in the rock samples, because
line interferences caused by other elements were
visible on some lines.
Following sterilization procedures, three rock
samples were taken from behind the biological
barrier and analyzed by atomic absorption procedures for the presence of iron, magnesium,
calcium, titanium, sodium, and potassium. The
rocks were also analyzed by a colorimetric procedure for the presence of silicon.
Sample weights were small, typically from 10
to 50 mg. Larger weights (150 mg) were available from those samples taken from behind the

131

PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION OF LUNAR SAMPLES

biological barrier, notably the biopool sample
(LRL specimen 10054), which represented a
500-g sample. A total of 23 analyses were made
on the rock samples. Analytical data resulting
from these analyses and for 12 typical lunar
samples are given in tables 5 1 and 51 1
-1
-1.
The rock samples were apparently kept free
from inorganic contamination from either the
rock box or the LM. Niobium, present in the
skirt of the descent engine exhaust (88 percent), was not detected (detection limit 50
ppm) and indium, which forms the seal of the
rock box, was not present (detection limit 1
P P ).~
Differences among the various rock samples
were less apparent than the overall similarity in
chemical composition (e.g., no samples contained less than 5 percent titanium dioxide). In
detail, significant variations were shown in many

of the trace elements, nickel, zirconium, rubidium, and potassium.
The major constituents of the rock samples are
silicon, aluminum, titanium, iron, calcium, and
magnesium. Sodium, chromium, manganese, potassium, and zirconium are minor constituents
ranging from a few hundred parts per million to
half a percent by weight.
The most striking features of the rock-sample
chemical compositions in comparison with terrestrial rocks, meteorites, or cosmic abundance estimates are the high concentrations of titanium,
zirconium, and yttrium. In comparison with
chondritic meteorites, the rock samples contain
lower concentrations of iron and magnesium
and higher concentrations of calcium and aluminum.
Among the trace and minor constituents, zirconium, strontium, barium, yttrium, and ytter-

TABLE
5--11. Elements detected in rock samples
[Elemental abundances]
Type C rocks
(breccias)

Type B rocks (crystalline)

Type A rocks (vesicular)

Element

Type D fine
rnaterial

bgFol
sa,nple

10022

Rubidiuma
Bariuma
Potassiumc
Strontiuma
Calciumc
Sodiumc
Ytterbiuma
Yttriuma
Zirconiuma
Chromiuma
Vanadiuma
Scandiuma
Titaniumc
Nickela
Cobalta
Coppera
Ironc
Manganesea
Magnesiumc
Lithiuma
Galliuma
Aluminumc
Siliconc

10072

10057

10020

10017

10058

10045

10050

10021

10061

10037

10054

(b)
100
.17
110
6.4
.30
7
230
1000
2800
36
110
6.6
320
15
(b)
16
2000
3.9
11.5
(b)
4.1
20

6.5
130
.17
55
6.8
.44
2
210
850
4700
30
45
6.0
(d)
12
5
13
2800
4.8
14
(b)
4.8
21

6.0
180
.15
230
7.1
.40
6
310
>2000
6500
40
110
7.5
25
22
(b)
15.5
3800
5.7
22
(b)
5.8
16.8

1.5
50
.053
85
7.1
.44
2.5
185
980
2100
20
110
7.2
(d)
3
4.5
14
2460
4.8
15
5
5.8
17.8

6.0
120
.18
55
7.1
.48
(b)
310
1250
4600
30
55
6.6
(d)
10
3
14.7
2700
5.1
95
(b)
5.3
18.7

1.6
85
.09
190
7.5
.41
5
230
250
3700
32
130
5.4
(d)
7
(b)
13
4300
3.9
19
(b)
6.9
20

1.9
115
.084
60
7.1
.38
1.3
100
700
3500
40
90
4.8
(d)
7
6
14
2100
4.2
15
4
6.9
19.6

0.8
60
.053
140
7.1
.38
2.7
130
700
4800
80
170
5.4
55
10
10
15.5
3900
6.0
10.5
8
5.8
17.8

(b)
105
.12
150
7.9
.15
4.5
300
1500
2500
22
68
5.2
215
13
(b)
14.8
1700
4.5
(b)
(b)
5.8
20

3.1
90
.15
60
7.9
.37
1.8
115
400
3000
32
55
5.4
235
12
8
12.4
2400
5.4
12.5
(b)
5.8
18.7

2.2
68
.10
90
8.6
.40
2.5
130
400
2500
42
55
4.2
250
18
(b)
12.4
1750
4.8
15
(b)
6.9
20

2
65
.ll
140
8.3
.38
2.5
200
500
2800
30
60
4.2
120
1
1
(b)
12.1
2600
4.6
15
(b)
6.9
19.6

"In parts per million.
bNo data.

"In percent.
*Not detected.

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

TABLE
5-111.

Elements detected in rock samples

[Abundances expressed as weight, in percent oxides]
Type C rocks
(breccias)

Type B rocks (crystalline)

Type A rocks (vesicular)
Oxide

10022

SiOz
A1203
Ti02
FeO
MgO
CaO
NazO
K2O
MnO
GrzO3
ZrOz
NiO
Total

43
7.7
11
21
6.5
9.0
.40
.21
.26
.41
.14
.04
99.0

10072

10057

10020

38
11
12
18
8
10
.59
.064
.32
.31
.13

10017

40
10
11
19
8.5
10
.65
.22
.35
.67
.19

10058

43
13
9
17
6.5
10.5
.56
.ll
.55
.54
.03

10045

42
13
8
18
7
10
.51
.10
.27
.51
.095

45
9
10
17
8
9.5
.60
.20
.36
.69
.ll

36
11
12.5
20
9.5
10
.54
.18
.49
.95
>.27

(a)

(a)

(a)

(a)

(a)

(a)

100.5

101.4

97.8

100.5

100.8

99.5

Type D fine
material

Bulk
hiopool
sample

10050

10021

10061

10037

10054

38
11
9
20
10
10
.51
.064
.SO
.70
.095
.007
99.9

43
11
8.6
19
7.4
11
.20
.15
.22
.37
.20
.03
99.8

40
12
10
16
9
11
.48
.17
.41
.69
.04
.04
99.8

43
13
7
16
8
12
.54
.12
.23
.37
.05
.03
100.3

42
13
7.0
15.6
7.6
11.6
.SO
.14
.34
.41
.07
.015
98.2

aNo data.

bium are enriched by one to two orders of
magnitude compared to chondritic abundances.
Potassium and rubidium are present in similar
amounts, and nickel and cobalt are depleted by
large factors compared to chondrites. Nickel was
not detected (less than 1 ppm) in several rock
samples. However, the iron content remains high
in these samples, and the iron-nickel ratios are
high. The concentration of zirconium is equaled
only by alkali-rich rocks in the crust of the
Earth, such as nepheline syenites.
Rubidium-strontium ratios are low, approaching those of oceanic basaltic rocks on the Earth.
Barium is relatively abundant and, like lithium,
resembles the concentration levels of continental
basaltic rocks (approximately 10 ppm). Chromium is notably abundant as a minor constituent,
and scandium is also present in larger amounts
than are generally found in terrestrial basalts.
Conversely, vanadium is less abundant than
either chromium or scandium.
The volatile elements (lead, bismuth, thallium,
etc.) are generally below the detection limits of
the spectrographic techniques employed. The
platinum-group elements, silver and gold, were
not detected. Thus, numerous differences in detail exist from terrestrial or meteoritic samples
previously available for analysis.

Rare-Gas Analytic Results

The gas analyses were obtained by using a
6-in., 60" magnetic deflection mass spectrometer.
The spectrometer is operated with a sensitivity
of approximately 2 X 10-lo cc/mV for helium,
neon, and argon and approximately 3 X 10-l3
cc/mV for krypton and xenon. Rock samples
were prepared under liquid nitrogen and air conditions. Chips of rock were taken, weighed,
wrapped in aluminum foil, and sterilized by
heating from 125" to 150° C for a 5- to 24-hr
period. The effect of the sterilization heatings
caused a release of less than 1 percent of the
gases present.
The rock samples were melted by radiofrequency induction heating in a molybdenum crucible. Vacuum conditions were maintained by a
water-cooled glass furnace with low heliumdiffusion characteristics. The gases released were
chemically purified with a hot titanium getter.
The heavier noble gases were condensed and introduced into the mass spectrometer for measurement under static vacuum conditions in three
fractions: (1) helium and neon, (2) argon and
krypton, and (3) xenon.
In general, after each rock sample was run, a
second heating was performed to insure that all

PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION O F LUNAR SAMPLES

the gas had been released from the rock and to
serve as a blank correction. The entire procedure
was standardized by introducing a calibrated
amount of the different rare gases into the mass
spectrometer.
The rare gases in the lunar samples show three
general patterns, which correspond to the three
rock types (breccias, igneous rocks, and fines).
Generally, the breccias and fines show extremely
large concentrations of rare gases. Large
amounts of noble gases are found in both surface
and subsurface breccia material. From the large
amounts of noble gases present and the isotopic
ratios, it is almost certain that the predominant
source for these gases is the solar wind. The only
other possible major source would be rare gases
condensed in lunar materials early in the history
of the solar system. The igneous rocks contain
less of the rare gases than do the other rocks.
This phenomenon can be interpreted either as
the result of a loss of rare gases during formation, or as a feature of igneous material representing subsurface lunar material that has not
been exposed to the solar wind except as a solid.
Temperature-release studies on both the fines
and the breccia reveal that the noble gases are
tightly bound and thus do not occur as simple
surface-absorbed gases.
The breccias appear to have been formed from
the fines near the surface of the Moon as a result
of some compacting process, possibly shock. This
conclusion is supported by petrological evidence.
The solar-wind noble gases may have been
driven into the separate grains as a result of
these shock events.

133

The results shown in table 5-IV indicate large
amounts of rare gases of solar composition. No
isotopic ratios have been measured previously
from the Sun; however, from theoretical considerations, it is generally accepted that nuclear
processes occur that cause the solar neon 20/22
ratio to be larger than that of the atmosphere
of the Earth. This enrichment is clearly present
in all the samples measured. In addition, the
helium on the surface of the Sun should be close
to the original helium content of the solar system. The 4He/3He ratio of approximately 2600
agrees well with previous theoretical estimates.
The low value of the 40Ar/36Arratio is exactly
what would be expected for solar isotopic composition. The relative elemental ratios for the
noble gases are those that would be expected in
the Sun if considerable helium and some neon
are assumed to be lost from the lunar surface
during the hot lunar day.
The isotopic ratios fcr xenon, presumed to be
of solar origin, in the fines and in a breccia are
presented in table 5-V. Isotopically, the xenon
in the two samples is identical. The isotopic pattern closely resembles that of trapped xenon
found in carbonaceous chondrites, except for a
slightly larger amount of the lighter xenon isotopes (presumably from spallation reactions)
and except for a deficiency of 134Xe 13'jXe.The
or
129Xe/132Xe
ratio in the measured material is essentially identical to that in carbonaceous chondrites. Krypton isotope data for the fine lunar
material are less precise, but resemble krypton
content found in carbonaceous chondrites.
Several of the crystalline rocks measured con-

TABLE
5-IV. Rare-gas analysis
Sample description

Krypton

Argon

Neon

Helitrm

10-8 c c / g 4oA 40/36

36/38

10-8 c c / g 4He

Lunar soil:
Sample A
Sample B
Typical agglomerate
rock:
Sample A
Sample B
Typical crystalline
rock:
Sample A
Sample B

2 0 / 2 2 22/21

Xenon

10-8 c c / g 10-8 c c / g

4/3

10-8 c c / g zoNc

10900 000
19 000 000

2500
2500

200 000
310 000

13
13

31
30

39 000
42000

1.1
1.2

5.3
5.4

38
36

38
16

15 100 000
16 000 000

2900
2700

320 000
230 000

13
13

29
29

150 000
110 000

2.3
2.2

5.2
5.2

73
49

46
42

63 000
28 000

180
270

210
200

3.1
7.0

1.3
2.3

5 700
1600

96
42

1.2
2.4

.34
.19

.65
.16

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

TABLE
5-V.
Sample

Fines
Breccia

lz4Xe

128Ye

0.0062
.0052

0.0071
.0057

iXe/132Xeratios

l z e ~ e

l2sXe

0.086
.084

1.07
1.07

tain radiogenic 40Ar and spallation-produced
noble gases which, when coupled with potassium
contents, enable potassium argon ages and
cosmic-ray radiation ages to be estimated. Seven
rocks have yielded potassium argon ages, all of
which are consistent with a value of 3.01t0.7X109
yr. Radiation ages show a wider variance among
different rocks, ranging from approximately lo7
yr to approximately 16X107 yr. The relative
amounts of spallation-produced helium, neon,
and argon differ from those in most stone
meteorites and probably reflect the unique
chemistry of the lunar material.
Gamma-Ray Spectrometry

The Radiation Counting Laboratory ( RCL )
received eight lunar samples for preliminary
study by nondestructive gamma-ray analysis.
These samples included one rock from the contingency sample, five rocks from the documentedsample box, and a sample of fines and one rock
from the hlk-sample box.
Because of the complex operations involved
in handling lunar material, preparation of
samples for analysis in the RCL was slow, and
analysis of the first RCL sample could not begin
until July 29, 1969. As a result, radioactive species with half lives of less than a few days were
not detectable. In addition, the intense interferences from the gamma-ray spectra of the
thorium and uranium decay series in the
samples made detection of weak gamma-ray
components very difficult.
The low-background gamma-ray spectrometers used in these studies were located 15 m
below the ground in a room supplied with
radon-free air and shielded by 0.9 m of compacted dunite inside a welded steel liner of low
radioactivity. The principal detector system
consisted of two 23-cm-diameter, 13-cm-long
NaI (Tl) detectors at 180° with the sample between them. Data were recorded in the singles
and coincidence modes. Response of the detectors was enhanced by use of a surrounding

l3o~e

0.165
.I64

l3lXe

0.829
.820

134~e

0.373
.37

136Xe

0.306
.304

anticoincidence mantle. Background was reduced further by surrounding the detectors and
the inner mantle with a thick lead shield, the
exterior of which was covered by a thin mesonsensitive anticoincidence mantle. Spectra were
also recorded with a large-volume Ge(Li) detector, which was located inside a lead shield
10 cm thick. However, all data in this report
were obtained from the NaI ( T1) scintillation
spectrometer. With the exception of the preamplifiers, all ancillary electronic instrumentation
was located in an adjacent control room.
For the preliminary investigation, the equipment was calibrated with the aid of a series
of standards prepared by dispersing known
amounts of radioactivity into quantities of electrolytically reduced iron powder. The weights
of the cylindrical dispersed samples, which had
a density of 3.4 g/cc, overlapped the range of
anticipated lunar-sample weights. Lunar samples
were transferred to the RCL for analysis in a
variety of nonstandard containers. The material
of the container affects the gamma-ray response
through gamma-ray scattering and absorption.
Where feasible, a library of standard spectra
was recorded with dispersed sources inside the
type of container used for the actual lunar
sample. However, this procedure could not be
followed in every instance. The activity of each
radionuclide was determined by using the
method of least squares to resolve the gammaray spectra.
Until it is possible to standardize the equipment with phantoms that have the same shape
and density and that contain known amounts of
the radionuclides of interest, the results of the
preliminary studies have been assigned large
errors. Some samples were processed for analysis without being weighed. In such cases, the
sample weight was estimated by correcting the
weight of the sample package for the weight of
the container, packing material, and biological
containment bags.
The results of the preliminary studies are

PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION O F LUNAR SAMPLES

summarized in table 5-VI. Twelve radioactive
species were identified; some identifications
were only tentative. The nuclides of shortest
half life that were characterized were 52Mn (half
life, 5.7 days) and 48V (half life, 16.1 days'). It
is important to note that the concentrations
listed in table 5-VI represent averages for the
entire sample (usually a rock) and, therefore, are
not subject to sampling errors if the rock is
inhomogeneous.
The amount of potassium present is variable
and ranges over the average potassium concentration (0.085 weight percent) for chondrites.
Conversely, the uranium and thorium concentrations are near the values for terrestrial basalts,
and the thorium-to-uranium ratio is approximately 4.1, with little variation. Despite variation of a factor of 5.6 in the potassium concentration, the potassium-to-uranium ratio determined for lunar surface material (2400 to 3100)
is remarkably constant and much lower than
similar ratios for terrestrial rocks or meteorites.
Yields of cosmogenic 2GA1 generally high,
are
and the 22Na/26A1
ratio is considerably below
unity in both the lunar rocks and the soil. The
high yields of 26A1may be understood in terms
of the chemical composition of the lunar surface
material, if the samples in question have been
exposed to cosmic-ray bombardment for several
half lives (0.74 X l o 6 years) of 2GA1 that the
SO
production of 2GA1
could reach saturation. Such
reasoning suggests that the material analyzed
in these studies has been exposed to cosmic
radiation for at least several million years, which
is in agreement with the rare-gas analyses.
Magnetic Measurements

Preliminary magnetic measurements have
been completed on 31 samples of crystalline rock
and breccia, using a triaxial fluxgate gradiometer in the vacuum chamber and class I11 cabinets. The level of significance of the results from
various samples ranged from 1 X
to
1X
emu/g. The significance level is a
function of sample weight, sample shape, intensity of magnetization, and the highly variable
magnetic interference generated by the cabinets
around the sample.
Of the 13 samples of crystalline rock measured, seven gave no measurable magnetic re-

g-~gmoacnum
o l t b
2 " o + lrd' +l I $
4
tlco$&
5:

2 .r.

a

147b
0 0 -

a&

136

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

sponse. In six samples, induced magnetization
of approximately 1 X
emu/g in fields
ranging from 0.3 to 1.9 Oe and with uncertainties from 25 to 50 percent was detected. One of
these six samples also had a barely detectable
remnant magnetization, approximately 3 X
emu/g with an uncertainty of approximately 50
percent.
The breccias are approximately 10 times as
magnetic as the crystalline rocks. Eighteen breccia~
were measured, five of which gave no measurable magnetic response. Seven of the breccia
samples showed only induced magnetization,
whereas both induced and remnant magnetization was detected in five samples. Intensities of
induced magnetization in various breccia samples ranged from 1 X 1012 to 1 X low4 emu/g
in fields ranging from 0.3 to 0.9 Oe and with uncertainties from.10 to 50 percent. The intensity
of remnant magnetization in the five samples
was approximately 1X lop3 emu/g with uncertainties from 20 to 50 percent. The ratio of remnant to induced magnetization for these five
samples varied between 0.4 and 0.9 Oe. Several
portions of fines from the contingency and bulk
samples were also measured; the specific susceptibilities of these fines ranged from 1X
to
emu/g, which is roughly 10 times
4X
greater than the specific susceptibilities of the
breccias.
Organic Chemical investigations

A simple survey method and a more elaborate
and specific technique have been used to estimate the abundance levels of organic matter in
the lunar samples. The survey method and the
specific technique are ( 1 ) a pyrolysis-flame ionization detector capable of yielding an estimate
of the total organic matter in the sample, regardless of type and origin, and ( 2 ) a computercoupled high-sensitivity mass spectrometer capable of yielding detailed mass-spectrometric
data on the volatile and/or pyrolyzable organic
matter as a function of sample temperature.
From the mass-spectrometric data (combined
with the vaporization characteristics), an assessment may be made of the relative contributions
of terrestrial contaminants versus the possible
indigenous lunar organic matter.

Pyrolysis-Flame Ionization Defector Determination of
Total Organic Carbon

Fourteen samples of lunar material were analyzed for total organic carbon content as part
of the preliminary examination at the LRL.
These samples included both fines and different
types of rocks from the contingency pouch and
the bulk and documented boxes.
The technique used in this determination is
based on the pyrolysis of small portions (10 to
40 mg) at 800° C in a Nichrome tube under a
flowing stream of hydrogen and helium, with
subsequent detection of the volatile products by
a hydrogen flame ionization detector. The combustion of the organic volatiles produces metastable oxygenated species in the flame zone which
undergo chemi-ionization to yield an ion current
proportional to the number of carbon atoms
entering the flame. After amplification and digital integration, the resultant single peak area is
compared with known standards on a log-log
least-squares calibration plot to yield the organic
carbon content in parts per million.
The detector response is highly specific to
organic compounds and does not result from
such inorganic gases as carbon dioxide, carbon
monoxide, water, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur oxides,
nitrogen oxides, hydrogen halides, etc. Graphite
and diamond are not detected by this technique.
Terrestrial soils give values of 30 to 500 ppm
from dry desert areas and values of 500 to 20 000
ppm from agricultural areas. Ancient sediment
rocks can yield values as low as 50 ppm when
most of the organic matter has been converted
into kerogenic material. By this method, a portion of the recently fallen Puebito de Allende
meteorite was found to contain 37 ppm of
organic carbon, and a sample of volcanic bomb
was found to have less than 1 ppm.
The apparatus for the determination is shown
in schematic form in figures 5-8 and 5-9 and is
shown in figure 5-10 as installed in the Class I11
cabinetry in the Physical Chemistry Test Laboratory of the LRL.
The fines from the contingency sample were
sampled 1 day after the plastic pouch had been
opened and the rocks removed with metallic
implements. This sample (sample 10010,5),
which indicated 16 rt 7 ppm of organic matter,

PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION O F LUNAR SAMPLES
,Electrometer

: am~lifier

137

.Pvrolvzer

I

Torroidal
transformer

8-I 1

Variac
high setting ---

Digital
integrator

Variac
low setting

adjustable
time delay
relay switch

---Recorder
(log output)

FIGURE
5-8. - Organic carbon electronics schematic,
Helium and hydrogen
in
stainless steel cone,,
f
Copper real

.---%

Nichrome tube---..---!
25-mg sample ------Electrometer
input -----

FIGURE5-9. - Organic carbon pyrolyzer-flame ionization
detector.

was exposed to the spacecraft and terrestrial
atmosphere during the return trip but was
handled carefully with respect to organic contamination. Therefore, it was concluded that
this sample was not heavily contaminated.
Eleven days later, after many intrusions into the
sample for other experiments, another portion
of these fines was analyzed, showing 48 2 18
ppm of organic matter. Microscopic examination
of these fines showed white fibers, which were
judged to be cellulose contamination.
Three rocks were analyzed from the contingency sample. An aggregate (sample 10021,21)
was chipped after extensive geologic examina-

FIGURE 5-10. - Biological enclosure, organic carbon determination.

tion (frequent rubber-glove contact) to give 44
ppm of organic matter. The crystalline rock
(sample 10024,4) was analyzed after only brief
geologic examination to give 17 ppm of organic
matter. Both these rocks had been stored in
plastic boxes. A third contingency rock (sample
10032,l), previously unexamined, was carefully
chipped under clean conditions and showed 10
ppm. These results from the contingency
samples show that even moderate handling
can easily introduce low amounts of organicmatter contamination. The primary contamination sources appear to be contact with rubber
gloves, plastic materials, fiber brushes and tissues, and air-Freon spray for dust removal.
However, because of the relatively simple processing procedure used with the contingency
sample, fairly clean samples can be obtained
with adequate precaution.
The documented box was opened in the F-201
vacuum chamber, which was known to contain
significant amounts of pump oil. In addition, the
relatively cumbersome hardsuit gloves made
sample processing more complex and subject to
contamination.
The fines (sample 10015,lO) from the gas
reaction cell were analyzed after exposure to
nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and oxygen and were
found to give 126 ppm. White filaments were
observed in this sample.
Three aggregate rock samples were taken
from chipping operations in the vacuum cham-

PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION O F LUNAR SAMPLES

a Scientific Data Systems Sigma 2 computer.
The mass spectrometer was designed to meet
the LRL biological-containment requirements,
which necessitate a sterilizable inlet system, and
the mass spectrometer was equipped with a
high-efficiency ion source and a high-gain electron multiplier. The online computer permitted
continuous control of the scanning circuit, recording of the mass spectra, and calibration of
the mass scale, spectrum normalization, and
visual (cathode-ray tube) display of the spectrum during each scan cycle.
The lunar material (approximately 50 mg)
was placed in a nickel capsule, sealed by a cold
weld, and transferred to the instrument inlet
system. The inlet system allowed insertion of
these capsules into an oven (at approximately
500° C) connected to the ionization chamber by
a heated 8-cm quartz tube.
To calibrate the system, three samples of
n-tetracosane on clean quartz ( a t concentrations
of 1, 2, and 3 ppm) were analyzed with the
mass spectrometer/computer system to determine the total ionization recorded versus the
amount of organic material present. (Concentration levels reported refer to an equivalent
signal of n-tetracosane.) Such concentrations are
relatively large in terms of instrument sensitivity.
The lunar material studied came from three
distinct sample types: ( 1 ) the core tubes; ( 2 )
fines (type D ) from the bulk box; and ( 3 ) interior and exterior chips, fine- and mediumgrained (types A and B ) and breccia (type C )
rocks that were returned in both boxes. Control
samples of outgassed clean sand (Ottawa sand),
which were exposed to the sample cabinet atmosphere for a length of time similar to the
lunar samples' exposure, were analyzed to estimate the amount of organic contamination introduced by exposure to the atmosphere.
The levels of organic matter observed from
this experiment, whether indigenous or of terrestrial origin ( contamination ) , were extremely
low (0.2 to 5.0 ppm). Because of this low level,
the quantity of organic matter determined can
vary widely with the slightest amount of organic
contaminant from anywhere in the entire samplehandling and storage procedure between the
Moon and the mass spectrometer. The analyses

139

of blanks and controls from all phases of lunarsample-handling and storage procedures, usually
using clean quartz, indicate that most of the
organic material observed in the lunar samples
is caused by organic matter contamination.
Data on a sample obtained from the core tube
and on a sample of fines from the bulk box may
indicate the presence of an extremely small
amount of pyrolyzable organic matter. This
assumption is based on the observation that the
abundance of ions at m / e 78 and 91 increased
in the spectra obtained later in the heating cycle
of these samples. These may be interpreted as
aromatic hydrocarbon ions that are indicative
of the products of the pyrolysis of indigenous
organic matter.
In conclusion, the maximum levels of indigenous organic matter indicated by the observations described in this report appear to be considerably less than 1 ppm.
Biology

The preliminary examination of samples has
included microscopic studies to find any living,
previously living, or fossil material, if possible.
No evidence of any such material has been
found.
Approximately 700 g of fines and rock chips
have been subjected to an extensive biological
protocol. A large variety of biological systems
was challenged with lunar material. The biological systems included the following:
( 1 ) Germ-free mice
( 2 ) Fish
( 3 ) Quail
( 4 ) Shrimp, oysters, and other invertebrates
(5) Several lines of tissue cultures
( 6 ) Several varieties of insects
( 7 ) A considerable number of plants
( 8 ) Lower animals, including paramecia
No evidence of pathogenicity had been observed when this report was written (August
23, 1969).
Conclusions

The major findings of this preliminary examination of the lunar samples are as follows:
( 1 ) The fabric and mineralogy of the rocks
allow the rocks to be divided into two genetic

140

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

groups: ( a ) fine- and medium-grained crystalline rocks of igneous origin, probably originally
deposited as lava flows, dismembered, and redeposited as impact debris and ( b ) breccias of
complex history.
( 2 ) The crystalline rocks are different from
any terrestrial rock and from meteorites, as
shown by the modal mineralogy and bulk chemistry.
( 3 ) Erosion has occurred on the lunar surface, as indicated by the rounding on most
rocks and by the evidence of exposure to a process that gives the rocks a surface appearance
similar to sandblasted rocks. No evidence exists
of erosion by surface water.
( 4 ) The probable presence of the assemblage
iron-troilite-ilmenite and the absence of any hydrated phase suggest that the crystalline rocks
were formed under extremely low partial pressures of oxygen, water, and sulfur (in the range
of those in equilibrium with most meteorites).
(5) The absence of secondary hydrated minerals suggests that there has been no surface
water at Tranquility Base at any time since the
rocks were exposed.
(6) Evidence of shock or impact metamorphism is common in the rocks and fines.
( 7 ) All the rocks display glass-lined surface
pits that may have been caused by the impact
of small particles.
( 8 ) The fine material and the breccia contain
large amounts of all noble gases with elemental
and isotopic abundances that almost certainly
were derived from the solar wind. The fact that
interior samples of the breccias contain these
gases implies that the breccias were formed at
the lunar surface from material previously exposed to the solar wind.
( 9 ) The 40K/40Armeasurements on igneous
rock indicate that those rocks crystallized
3 X lo9 to 4 X lo9 yr ago. Cosmic-ray-produced
nuclides indicate the rocks have been within 1m
of the surface for periods of 20 X lo6 to 160 X
lo6yr.
(10) The level of indigenous volatilizable
and/or pyrolyzable organic material appears to
be extremely low (i.e., much less than 1 ppm).
(11) The chemical analyses of 23 lunar

samples show that all rocks and fines are generally similar chemically.
(12) The elemental constituents of lunar
samples are the same as those found in terrestrial igneous rocks and meteorites. However,
several significant differences in composition
occur: some refractory elements (e.g., titanium
and zirconium) are notably enriched and the
alkalis and some volatile elements are depleted.
(13) Elements that are enriched in iron meteorites (i.e., nickel, cobalt, and the platinum
group) were not observed, or such elements
were low in abundance.
(14) Of 12 radioactive species identified, two
were cosmogenic radionuclides of short half life,
namely 53Mn (half life 5.7 days) and 48V (half
life 16.1 days).
(15) Uranium and thorium concentrations lie
near the typical values for terrestrial basalts;
however, the potassium-to-uranium ratio determined for lunar surface material is much lower
than such values determined for either terrestrial
rocks or meteorites.
(16) The high observed 26A1concentration is
consistent with a long cosmic-ray exposure age
inferred from the rare-gas analysis.
(17) No evidence of biological material has
been found in the samples to date.
(18) The lunar soil at the LM landing site
is predominantly fine grained, granular, slightly
cohesive, and incompressible. The hardness increases considerably at a depth of 6 in. The soil
is similar in appearance and behavior to the soil
at the Surveyor landing sites.
Discussion

The data and descriptive information in this
report were obtained to characterize the materials about to be distributed to principal investigators and their associates for specialized and
detailed study. The usefulness of this information in the selection of material for particular
experiments is well illustrated by the rare-gas
data. It would have been impossible to select
material suitable for a careful study of the
cosmic-ray-produced isotopes of neon, argon,
krypton, and xenon, or even for a straightforward potassium-argon age without the knowledge of the variations in rare-gas content shown

PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION O F LUNAR SAMPLES

in table 5-IV. Similarly, the organic matter analyses provide guidance in selecting material for
further experiments and study of organic matter
in lunar materials.
In spite of the limited and specific objectives,
the preliminary examination has provided significant, and a few unexpected, results on longrecognized questions.
The existence of an unexplained erosion process on the lunar surface was clearly indicated
by both the Ranger and the Lunar Orbiter
photographs. These photographs frequently show
very fresh block craters interspersed among
smoothed craters. Photographs of individual
rocks on Surveyor photographs give further evidence of rounding and abrasion of hard rocks
on the lunar surface. The surface morphology,
glass pits, and splashes seen on both hard and
fragmental rocks suggest that samples are now
available for detailed laboratory examination
that may elucidate a widespread and important
mechanism on the lunar surface. The evidence
provided by the first examination of these rocks
indicates that this process is unlike any process
so far observed on Earth.
The chemical composition of the Tranquility
Base fines and igneous rocks is unlike those of
any known terrestrial rock or meteorite. The
unique characteristic is the unusually high titanium, zirconium, yttrium, and chromium content
in the lunar rocks, compared to other rocks with
this approximate bulk composition. Also of great
interest is the low sodium, potassium, and rubidium content. It is particularly significant that
the unique composition is that of a silicate
liquid. If this liquid has a volcanic origin, the
unique composition implies either that- the composition of the rock from which the liquid was
derived differs significantly from the composition of the mantle of the Earth, or that the
mechanism by which the liquid was formed
and/or the fractional crystallization of this liquid
on the Moon may also differ from terrestrial
analogs. The nearly identical composition found
for the fines, fragmental rocks, and igneous
rocks suggests that the unique composition
observed for the Tranquility Base materials is
characteristic of that part of the Moon and not
the result of a local isolated flow or intrusion.

141

Several specific geochemical observations on
the igneous rocks can be made from the present
data. The potassium-to-uranium ratios (2400 to
3200) of the lunar materials are unusually low,
both when compared to chondritic meteorites
(45 000) and when compared to most common
Earth rocks (10 000). This ratio is not readily
changed by terrestrial igneous processes (refs.
5-1 and 5-2). If this generalization is extended
to lunar igneous processes, observed ratios can
be inferred to be characteristic of the entire
Moon. Similarly, the rubidium-to-strontium ratio
is more like that of the Earth and achondritic
meteorites than that of chondritic meteorites and
the Sun. Both these chemical characteristics suggest that, relative to chondrites, the Moon, like
the Earth, is depleted in alkali metals greater
than sodium in atomic number (ref. 5 3 ) .
Variations in other elemental ratios that are
easily fractionated during igneous differentiation
processes (e.g., nickel/magnesium and barium/
strontium) suggest that chemical differentiation
has occurred in the formation of the igneous
rocks. The abundance of radioactive elements
(potassium, uranium, and thorium) in the surface materials is much greater than that inferred
(from thermal models of the Moon) for the
mean radioactive element content of the Moon
(ref. 5-4). This finding leads to the inference
that the surface materials are chemicalay differentiated with respect to the entire Moon.
The unusually high abundance of high-atomicnumber elements (iron and titanium) is clearly
consistent with the unusually high densities (3.1
to 3.5 g/cc) reported previously. Both the Surveyor alpha back-scattering analyses (ref. 5-5)
and optical studies (ref. 5-6) indicate that mare
materials may have significantly higher iron contents than highland materials. Assuming the
rather plausible generalization that the densities
of Tranquility Base rocks are characteristic of
other mare regions, one can infer that large areas
of the lunar surface, particularly the mare regions, may be made of materials with densities
in excess of the mean density of the Moon.
Perhaps the most exciting and profound observation made in the preliminary examination is
the great age of the igneous rocks from this lunar
region. The potassium argon age is both intrinsi-

142

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

cally and experimentally uncertain; nevertheless,
it is clear that the crystallization of some Apollo
1 rocks may date back to times earlier than the
1
oldest rocks found on Earth. It seems likely that
1
if the age of the Apollo 1 rocks does not date
back to the time of formation of the Moon, rocks
from other regions of the Moon will.
References
5-1. BIRCH,A. F.: Differentiation of the Mantle. Geol.
Soc. Am. Bull., vol. 69, no. 4, Apr. 1958, pp.
483-486.
G.
G.
5-2. WASSERBURG,J.; MACDONALD, J. F.; HOYLE,
F.; and FOWLER, A.: Relative Contributions
W.
of Uranium, Thorium, and Potassium to Heat
Production in the Earth. Science, vol. 143, no.
3605, 1964, pp. 465-467.
5-3. CAST,P. W.: History of the Earth's Crust. R. A.
Phinney, ed., Princeton University Press, 1968,
pp. 15-27.
D.
R.
5-4. ANDERSON, L.; and PHINNEY, A.: Early Thermal History of the Terrestrial Planets. In Mantles
of the Earth and Terrestrial Planets, S. K. Runcorn, ed., Interscience Publishers (London), 1967,
pp. 113-126.
A.
W.
5-5. TURKEVICH, L.; ANDERSON, A.; ET AL.: Surveyor Project Final Report, Part 11. Science
Results. NASA TR 32-1265, 1968.
J.
5-6. ADAMS, B.: Lunar and Martian Surfaces: Petrologic Significance of Absorption Bands in the
Near-Infrared. Science, vol. 159, no. 3822, 1968,
pp. 1453-1455.

Bibliography
Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences: Conference on Potential Hazards of Back Contamination
from the Planets, July 29-30, 1964.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration; the Department of Agriculture; the Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare; the Department of the Interior; and the National Academy of Sciences: Interagency Agreement on the Protection of the Earth's
Biosphere from Lunar Sources of Contamination, August 24, 1967.
MCLANE, C., JR.; KING,E. A., JR.; FLORY, A.; RICHJ.
D.
ARDSON, A.; DAWSON, P.; KEMMERER, W.; and
K.
J.
W.
WOOLEY, C.: The Lunar Receiving Laboratory. SciB.
ence, vol. 155, 1967, pp. 525-529.
SHOEMAKER, M.; MORRIS, C.; BATSON, M.; HOLT,
E.
E.
R.

H. E.; LARSON, B.; MONTGOMERY, R.: RENNILK.
D.
SON, J.; and WHITAKER, A,: Jet Propulsion LaboJ.
E.
ratory Tech. Rept. 32-1265, 1969, p. 21.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The following people contributed directly in obtaining
the data and in the preparation of this report: D. H.
Anderson, Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC); E. E.
Anderson, Brown and Root-Northrop ( BRN ) ; Klaus Bieman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT); P. R.
Bell, MSC; D. D. Bogard, MSC; Robin Brett, MSC; A. L.
Burlingame, University of California at Berkeley; W. D.
Carrier, MSC; E. C. T. Chao, United States Geological
Survey (USGS); N. C. Costes, Marshall Space Flight
Center; D. H. Dahlem, USGS; G. B. Dalrymple, USGS;
R. Doell, USGS; C. C. Davis, Ames Research Center;
J. S. Eldridge, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL);
M. S. Favaro, United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA); D. A. Flory, MSC; Clifford Frondel, Harvard
University; R. Fryxell, Washington State University; John
Funkhouser, State University of New York, Stony Brook;
P. W. Gast, Columbia University; W. R. Greenwood,
MSC; Maurice Grolier, USGS; C. S. Gromme, USGS;
G. H. Heiken, MSC; W. N. Hess, MSC; P. H. Johnson,
BRN; Richard D. Johnson, Ames Research Center; Elbert
A. King, Jr., MSC; N. Mancuso, MIT; J. D. Menzies,
USDA; J. K. Mitchell, University of California at Berkeley; D. A. Morrison, MSC; R. Murphy, MIT; G. D. O'Kelley, ORNL; G. G. Schaber, USGS; 0. A. Schaeffer, State
University of New York, Stony Brook; D. Schleicher,
USGS; A. H. Schmitt, MSC; Ernest Schonfeld, MSC;
J. W. Schopf, University of California at Los Angeles;
R. F. Scott, California Institute of Technology; E. M.
Shoemaker, California Institute of Technology; B. R.
Simoneit, University of California at Berkeley; D. H.
Smith, University of California at Berkeley; R. L. Smith,
USGS; R. L. Sutton, USGS; S. R. Taylor, Australian
National University; F. C. Walls, University of California
at Berkeley; Jeff Warner, MSC; Ray E. Wilcox, USGS;
J. Zahringer, Max-Planck-Institute, Heidelberg, Germany.
The members of the Lunar Sample Analysis Planning
Team are W. N. Hess (Chairman), Physicist, MSC; J. R.
Arnold, Geochemist, University of California, San Diego;
G. Eglinton, Geochemist, University of Bristol, England;
C. Frondel, Mineralogist, Harvard University; P. W. Gast,
Geochemist, Columbia University; E. M. Shoemaker,
Geologist, California Institute of Technology; M. G. Simmons, Geophysicist, MIT; R. M. Walker, Geophysicist,
Washington University; G. J. Wasserburg, Geochemist,
California Institute of Technology; L. P. Zill, Biologist,
Ames Research Center.

6. Passive Seismic Experimen f
Gary V . Latham, Maurice Ewing, Frank Press,
George Sutton, James Dorman, Nafi Toksoz,
Ralph W g g i n s , Yosio Nakamura, John Derr, and Frederick Duennebier

Purpose of the Passive Seismic Experiment

The Passive Seismic Experiment Package
(PSEP), which was deployed on the lunar sur1
face by the Apollo 1 astronauts, was the principal tool for determining the internal structure,
physical state, tectonic activity, and composition
of the Moon. Detailed investigation of the lunar
structure must await the establishment and operation of a network of seismic stations; however, a
single suitable well-recorded seismic event can
provide information that is of fundamental importance and that could not be gained in any
other way.
The PSEP flown on the Apollo 1 mission
1
offered the first opportunity for demonstrating
the feasibility of lunar seismic exploration. Seismometers are among the most delicate of scientific instruments. They are normally operated on
piers in underground vaults at sites especially
selected for environmental stability and a low
level of background noise. The impossibility of
attaining such favorable operating conditions on
the lunar surface posed many design problems.
A principal goal of this experiment was to demonstrate the feasibility of obtaining seismic records of motions of the lunar surface and to interpret them in terms of lunar structure. The
problem to be resolved was to produce seismometers that could be installed with a minimum demand on an astronaut's time and energy,
be adjusted and calibrated by remote control,
be operated on a foundation with uncertain mechanical properties and with sensitivity characteristics that could be adjusted to conform with
the background noise characteristics of the
Moon, and that could remain operable through
the large changes in temperature on the lunar
surface.

The PSEP was successfully installed at Tranquility Base as part of the Apollo 1 mission
1
and was operated for 21 days. It demonstrated
that the goals of lunar seismic exploration could
indeed be achieved.
Instrument Performance

The PSEP is shown schematically in figure
6-1. The system weighs 48 kg and uses solar cells
to supply power. Thus, operation of the PSEP
is confined to lunar day. The PSEP sensor unit
contains three long-period ( L P ) seismometers
with resonant periods of 15 sec, alined orthogonally to measure surface motion in both horizontal
and vertical directions, and a single-axis, shortperiod (SP) seismometer sensitive to vertical
motion at higher frequencies (resonant period
of 1 sec).
Low-frequency, horizontal-component seismometers are extremely sensitive to tilt and must
be leveled to high accuracy. In the Apollo seismic system, the two low-frequency, horizontalcomponent seismometers are leveled to within 2
seconds of arc from the local vertical direction
by means of a two-axis, motor-driven gimbal
(one motor for each seismometer). A third motor
adjusts the low-frequency, vertical-component
seismometer in the vertical direction. Motor
operation is controlled from the Earth. These
elements are shown schematically in figure 6-2.
The low-frequency seismometers are mounted in
crisscross fashion to achieve a minimum volume
configuration. The instrument is controlled from
the Earth by a set of 15 commands that control
such functions as speed and direction of the leveling motors, instrument gain, and calibration.
Seismic data were obtained from the Apollo
11 seismometer system for 21 days. Initial activa-

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

144

,,-*'Antenna
Passive seismic
unit,

,,Handle for
, ' astronaut
,'

linkaae

'Antenna '',Carry

mast

handle

FIGURE - Diagram of the fully erected PSEP.
6-1.

-axis

TODview

(2)sensor

l nertial mass--------

i

'Caging bellows
(retract for uncage)

Sensor

L P horizontal
(X,Y) sensors

/

mass------Bellows (retract

FIGURE -Schematic diagrams of the elements of
6-2.
the low-frequency ( L P ) seismometers.

tion was on July 21, 1969, and final turnoff was
on August 27, 1969. The instrument was emplaced south of the lunar module (LM), 16.8 m
from the nearest point of the LM, as shown in
figure 3-16. The PSEP is shown erected on the
lunar surface in figure 6-3.
Termination of the experiment on August 27
resulted from failure of the system to receive and
execute commands from Earth. Analysis of calibration pulses and signals received from various
astronaut activities indicates that all four seismometers operated properly until the final 2
days of operation when the LP seismometers
drifted out of their operating ranges and could
not be recentered because of the absence of command capability. Instrument response curves, as
derived from calibration pulses, are shown in
figure 6-4.
Aside from the eventual failure of the system
to respond to commands, the most significant
deviation from nominal operating characteristics
was that the actual maximum instrument temperature (190° F) exceeded the planned maximum (140' F) by SO0 F. This resulted in occasional transient signals on the LP seismometer
channels and several other minor effects, but did
not significantly degrade instrument performance. The PSEP performance fully demonstrated
the feasibility of operating seismic instruments
in the lunar environment.
One problem that became evident in the early
stages of the experiment was that the LM is a
source of seismic signals of unexpectedly large
amplitudes. Such seismic signals are assumed to
be generated primarily by venting gases or circulating fluids, or both, within the LM. Inelastic
deformation of the LM structure in response to
thermoelastic stress may also be a significant
source of seismic noise. Such noise signals make
interpretation of the data obtained from the experiment more difficult because they must be
recognized and separated from the signals of
events of natural origin that are sought.
The problem of seismic noise from the LM
will be reduced in later missions when the seismometers can be deployed at greater distances
from the LM. Because of this problem, every
effort must be made to achieve the greatest possible separation between the LM and the seismometers.

PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERIMENT

145

FIGURE -Photograph of the PSEP immediately after its deployment on the lunar surface.
6-3.

Description of Recorded Seismic Signals
LP Seismometers

Aside from occasional transient signals of instrument origin, the most conspicuous signals
observed on the seismograms from the LP seismometers are a series of wave trains having the
appearance of surface waves, that is, waves that

would propagate along the surface of the Moon
in contrast to body waves, which travel through
the lunar interior. A total of 30 such signals can
be clearly identified. No signals that might be
classified as body waves are observed in relation
to these wave trains. Most of the trains begin
with SP ( 2 to 4 sec) oscillations that gradually
increase to periods of 16 to 18 sec; that is, tbe

146

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1
1 8E
-

-

p
.

E,

;E
lo8

.

I

-

U
-

I

I

7-

9

-

I
I
I

,

I

m

-

f

a
,

'
I

1
I
1

I
I

I

I

I

\

I

I

I

I
I
I

I
I
I

I
I

I

I

I
I
I

8

I
I
I

-

I

I

1

I

I

2

I
t
1
t

II
I

I

I
I
I

I
I
I

I

I

3-;

I

I

I
I

1

I
1
I
I

I

I

:
,
!

I

\

I
I
I

I

E:
$10 102
162

I
\
t
\

I
t

I
I

,
!

2 ,

-

I
I

I

-

L

\

,
I

1

I

.P10 E
0

El0 E
w
-

\

tI
I
\

I

1

5

c

I
I
I

I
I

-

0

\

\

I

-

3

C

I

1

-

a

8

,!

0
.-

8

',
I,
\

I
I

I

b

.C

\.

'x--"----.:
I '\,
'

I

g10 E
0
a
E -

LP

,'
,

(
*
.

I

E

trains are dispersed. The first of these recorded
wave trains is shown in figure 6-5. This wave
train is primarily on the x-component. For severa1 wave trains, the period range is between
20 and 50 sec. No corresponding signals are
found on the LP vertical-component seismograms. Dispersion curves (wave period versus
arrival time) for the first three wave trains are
shown in figure 6-6.
During the second lunar day that the experiment was operational, several of these wave
trains were observed to occur simultaneously
with a series of pulses on the SP vertical seismometer. The pulses on the SP vertical seismometer are of uniform amplitude, and the time

sP

' I;;'

\

I

I I 'I1;;0

I I '";;l

I I

I 3

I "';;-l

Perid, sec

F1~m-w
6-4. -Response curves for the SP and LP xismometers (for the highest gain setting). Response
curves for the three LP seismometers are matched to
within 5 percent. One digital unit is equal to 5 IEV.
S P seismometer, type B events

interval between pulses gradually increases. In
the situations where wave trains and pulses on
the SP vertical seismometer occur simultaneously, it is evident that the LP wave trains are
simply the summation of the transient signals
that correspond to the pulses. Amplitudes are of
the order of 10 mpm peak-to-peak, so these are
extremely small signals. While a natural origin
for these signals cannot vresentlv be excluded.
the evidence strongly
this
Set
is produced by instrumental effects
that are, as yet, unexplained.

-

suggests ihat

LM venting (?I

1 -

1 min

-wave

train-

*
1 min
Y

FIGURE
6-5. -Sample of a high-frequency seismic signal, perhaps generated by the LM,
recorded by the SP seismometer and a sample of the background noise on the
LP seismometer channels. This section of the seismic record includes one of the
dispersed wave trains.

PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERIMENT

0

0 Event on July 22, 1969
Event on July 23, 1969

0Event on July 24,

1969

I

0

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

2

4

6

8

10
Wave period, sec

12

14

16

18

I
20

FIGURE -Dispersion curves (wave train period versus arrival time) for three of the
6-6.
dispersed wave trains recorded by the SP seismometer.

The SP Seismometer

A great variety of high-frequency ( 2 to 18 Hz)
signals is present on the seismograms from the
SP seismometer. As a part of the preliminary
investigations, an attempt has been made to sort
these signals into descriptive categories based
primarily upon the shapes of the signal envelopes and the spectral characteristics of each
type. Only a few spectra are available at the
present time. The signals are divided into the
following categories :
( 1 ) Signals produced by astronaut activities
while the astronauts were on the lunar surface
(type A)
( 2 ) Signals with impulsive onset and relatively short duration (types I and X )

( 3 ) Signals with emergent onset and relatively long duration (types B, M, T, and L )
Refinement in this categorization process can
be expected as the investigation proceeds. Such
refinement will be conducted with a view toward
a better understanding of the source mechanisms
involved.
Type A. Signals produced by astronaut activities were prominent on the SP seismometer from
initial operation until LM ascent. Such signals
were particularly strong when the astronauts
were in physical contact with the LM. The signal
produced when Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong
ascended the ladder to reenter the LM is shown

APOLLO 11 PRELIhlINARY SCIENCE REPORT

148
S P seismometer

Initial contact
with ladder

m
I*

5 sec

H

m

-1

FIGURE -Signal recorded when Astronaut Armstrong ascended the ladder of the LM.
6-7.

in figure 6-7. The spectra of signals from various
astronaut activities are shown in figure 6-8. The
predominant frequency of all of the type A signals is between 7.2 and 7.3 Hz. This predominant
frequency is assumed to correspond to a fundamental mode of vibration of the LM. Three items
that were ejected from the LM struck the surface, and the spectra received also contain the
7.2-Hz peak (fig. 6-9). (These items were two
portable life support systems, weighing 75 Ib
each, and the LM armrests, weighing a total of
12 Ib.) However, it is important to note that the
peaks near 11 and 13 Hz in figure 6-9 would be
dominant if the spectra were corrected for instrument response. The spectral peak at 7.2 Hz,
perhaps caused by LM resonance, was generated
presumably because each ejected item struck the
LM porch and ladder while falling to the surface.
In the spectra of signals recorded after the
departure of the LM ascent stage, the spectral
peak near 7.2 is shifted to 8.0 Hz. Resonances
in the LM descent-stage structure, which was
left on the lunar surface, would be expected to
shift to higher frequencies when the mass of
the ascent stage was removed.
The spectrum of one sample of signals from
astronaut activity that was performed while the
astronaut was not in contact with the LM is

included in figure 6-5 for comparison with activities that were performed in physical contact
with the LM. In the spectrum of sample ( h )
of figure 6-8, Astronaut Armstrong was collecting rock samples in the vicinity of the seismometers. The relative spectral content at higher
frequencies (10 to 15 Hz) is greater for the
sample ( h ) spectrum than for the other samples.
Seismic signals in this frequency range can thus
be attributed to astronaut footfalls on the lunar
surface.
Type B. When the PSEP was turned on, type
B signals with very large amplitudes were present on the SP seismometer record. The signals
gradually decreased over a period of S days,
until they disappeared completely on July 29,
1969. Maximum signal levels of approximately
200 mpm were recorded during the initial stages
of activity. Type B signals are shown in figures
6-5 and 6-10. The sections of the record that
are shown in figure 6-10 were recorded during
the final stages of activity. After a puzzling
sequence of changes in pattern, the signals became repetitive with nearly identical structure
from train to train. The interval between events
generally decreased to approximately 30 sec near
their termination. Type B signals reappeared for
a period of 13 hr during the second lunar day
(13:OO hr on August 21, 1969, to 02:OO hr on

FIGURE - Spectra of signals recorded by the SP seismometer during various astronaut
6-8.
activities: ( a ) Astronaut Aldrin ascending LM ladder, ( b ) Astronaut Annstrong
ascending Lhf ladder, ( c ) reaction-control-thruster test firing (first quad),
( d ) reaction-control-thruster test firing (second quad), ( e ) impact of the
second portable life support system, ( f ) impact of the first portable life support
system, ( g ) impact of the LM armrests, and ( h ) Astronaut Armstrong collecting samples in the vicinity of PSEP. Spectra are not corrected for instrument
response.

PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERlh4ENT

.3Or

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Frequency, Hz

150

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

Impact of LM armrests (12 Ib)

Impact of first portable life support system (75 Ib)

Impact of second portable life support system (75 Ib)
I

I

~

l

l

l

l

l

l

l

l

~

l

~

l

l

l

l

l

I

l

~

l

l

l

~

~

l

~

~

l

~

l

l

l

l

l

l

Time, sec

FIGURE
6-9. - Seismic signals recorded by the SP seismometer when various objects ejected
from the LM struck the lunar surface.

July 26, 1969

FIGURE
6-10. -Real-time record section from the SP seismometer showing type B and type
M signals.

August 22, 1969) that the experiment was operational.
Spectra of three type B signals (and three
type M signals) are shown in figure 6-11. The
dominant spectral peak is 8.0 Hz. A subordinate
peak at 6.5 Hz is also suggested. These type B
events occurred after LM ascent. Before ascent,
the predominant frequency was approximately
7.2 Hz. As mentioned previously, this shift in
resonant frequency can be explained as the result of removing the mass of the ascent stage
from the LM. The repetitive character of type B
events, the apparent correlation of type B signals
with LM resonant frequencies, and the eventual .

disappearance of type B signals have led to the
tentative conclusion that the signals were produced within the LM structure, presumably by
venting or circulating gases or liquids, or both.
Type M. In the 34-hr interval between 23:OO
hr on July 25, 1969, and 09:OO hr on July 27,
1969, 14 seismic signals with unusually large
amplitudes and long duration were recorded.
These signals began impulsively and lasted up
to 7 min for the largest trains. Low frequencies
(one-tenth to one-fifteenth Hz) associated with
the largest of these wave trains were also
observed on the LP vertical-component seismometer (LPZ) records. No related signal was

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERIMENT
Type B signals

Frequency, Hz

.30

r

Type M signals

Frequency, Hz

FIGURE
6-11. -Spectra of type B signals (samples ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) ) and type M signals
(samples ( d ) , ( e ) , and ( f ) ).
response.

Spectra are not corrected for instrument

152

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

1 rnin

Aug 25, 1969

FIGURE6-12. - Real-time record section of type T, I, and X signals from the SP seismometer.

Aug 20, 1969

FIGURE6-13. - Real-time record section of type T, L, and X signals from the SP seismometer.

observed on the horizontal components. The
type M signals are believed to represent a separate class of events. A type M signal is shown
in figure 6-10. Spectra for three type M events
are shown in figure 6-11. These spectra are remarkably similar to the spectra of the type B
events; hence, type M events may also have
been generated within the LM.
Type T . Type T signals have emergent beginnings and reach maximum amplitudes within 10
sec after initial motion. The train gradually decreases in amplitude and has a total duration
(above the 1-mm trace amplitude) of 1to 4 min.
Several samples of type T signals are shown in
figures 6-12 and 6-13. The interval between signals is quite regular for long periods of time
with very repetitive waveforms. In detail, the
waveform changes with time in a complicated
fashion. Type T events ceased completely on
August 25, 1969.
Spectra for five type T signals are shown in
figure 6-15. All type T event spectra show a
broad peak near 8 Hz and a sharp peak between

Aug 3, 1969

FIGURE6-14. -Real-time record section of a type X
signal from the SP seismometer.

12.8 and 14.7 Hz. A prominent peak near 5.7 Hz
is contained in four of the spectra. When corrected for instrument response, the peak between
12.8 and 14.7 Hz would dominate all spectra.
Type I. Type I signals have impulsive beginnings and relatively short durations (less than
1 min). An example of a type I signal is shown
in figure 6-12. No systematic pattern in the time
of occurrence has been found for this type of
signal. Spectra of seven type I signals are shown
in figure 6-16. Samples ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) in

PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERIMENT

.017

-

Frequency. Hz

f

.016 -

.015 .014 .013 .012 .011.010 .009 -

2

4

6

8
10 12
Frequency, Hz

14

16

18

20

FIGURE
6-15. -Spectra of five type T signals. Spectra are not corrected for instrument
response.

figure 6-16 are similar; all have a sharp peak
near 8 Hz and a subordinate peak near 15 Hz.
Samples ( d ) , ( e ) , and ( f ) in figure 6-16 are

distinctly different from one another and from
the first group. It is evident that several source
mechanisms are involved in type I signals. Pos-

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1
8.25 r

Frequency, Hz

FIGURE
6-16. -Spectra of seven type I signals. Spectra are
not corrected for instrument response.

155

PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERIMENT

sible sources for type I signals include ( 1 )
meteoroid impacts on the LM, on the lunar surface near the LM, and on the PSEP; ( 2 ) thermoelastic energy release within the LM and the
PSEP; and ( 3j LM (and possibly PLSS ) venting.
Type L. Type L signals have emergent beginnings and relatively long durations ( 1 to 6 min).
The wave train builds up slowly and recedes
slowly into the background, with maximum trace
amplitude rarely exceeding 5 mm from peak to
peak (approximately 3.3 mpm at 8 Hz). A type L

6.00

r

5 . 6 ~

signal spectrum is shown in figure 6-13. No regularity in the time of occurrence has been found
for this type of signal. Of the various types of
events, type L events contain the greatest variability in signal character and in time of occurrence. Spectra of three type L signals are shown
in figure 6-17. As was noted for type I signals,
type L signals show little similarity in spectral
character for the few samples that have been
computed. Thus, the presence of a variety of
sources for type L events is inferred.
Type X. Type X signals have impulsive begin-

Type L signals

,

Type L signals

.225

r

Frequency, Hz

Type X signals

Frequency, Hz

FIGURE
6-17. - Spectra of type L signals (samples ( a ) , ( b ) , ( c ) ) and type X (sample ( d ) )
signals. Spectra are not corrected for instrument response.

156

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

nings and relatively short durations (normally
less than 10 sec). Maximum amplitudes occur
at the beginning of the wave train and decay
exponentially with a low-frequency ( 2 to 3 Hz)
component that is usually evident in the tail of
the train. Several examples of type X signals are
shown in figures 6-12, 6-13, and 6-14. No regularity in the time interval between type X events
has been found. The spectrum of a type X signal
is shown in figure 6-17. Prominent peaks occur
at 2.8, 8.0, and 10.8 Hz. When corrected for instrument response, the peaks at 2.8 Hz and at
10.8 Hz are dominant. The signal for which the
spectrum (fig. 6-17) is shown occurred 38 hr
after initial turnon, at the time when background
signals of the B type were quite high; therefore,
the 8.0-Hz peak may be the result of contamination associated with type B signals.
The spectral characteristic that clearly distinguishes type X signals from the other types of
signals is the low-frequency peak (at 2.8 Hz).
The most conspicuous structural resonance present within the PSEP in the 0- to 20-Hz band is
associated with vertical oscillation of the solarpanel arrays. During development testing, the
resonant frequency for this mode of oscillation
was found to be 2.6 Hz. The coincidence of these
frequencies and the clearly resonant character
of the signal strongly support the hypothesis that
solar-panel oscillation is the main contributor to
type X signals. The most obvious sources for
excitation of the solar-panel resonances are impacts of micrometeoroids on the PSEP and sudden dislocations produced within the PSEP
structure by thermoelastic stress.
A histogram of activity for type X, I, L, and T
signals is shown in figure 6-18. This figure represents the intensity of activity for each type of
signal as measured on the SP seismometer. Logging of these different types of events was begun
on the seismic records for July 28, 1969, when
the level of periodic repetitive noises (type B
signals) had subsided sufficiently so that type
X, I, L, and T signals could be identified and
compared with signals in later records. The
vertical axis of each bar graph is a measure of
the intensity of the activity. The width of each
bar of the graph spans the time interval on each
seismogram (usually 12 hr).

Instrument
temperature

V

I

l

l

l

l

l

,

lNight

l

L

l

I

l

l nstrument
temperature

l

I

l

l

I

l

l

2 8 2 9 3 0 31 1 2 3 U19 20 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 26 27
July, 1969
August, 1969

FIGURE
6-18. - A histogram of the intensity of activity
for type X, I, T, and L signals.

The intensity of activity plotted in figure 6-18
is the summation of all peak-to-peak trace amplitudes greater than 1 mm on a particular seismogram, divided by the time interval t of the seismogram, in hours. Thus, the area of each bar
of the graph is proportional to the total peak-topeak trace amplitude, in millimeters, for all
events of the particular type that occurred on
the seismogram corresponding to that bar. The
total area under a curve is, therefore, a measure
of the cumulative intensity for the particular
type of event. A curve showing central-station
internal temperature is also given in figure 6-18.
As shown in figure 6-18, type X and T activities were more intense during the second Iunar
day of the experiment than during the first one,
and type L activity declined slightly from the
first lunar day to the second. Type I activity
does not clearly change in a systematic way with
time. There is a possibility that type X activity
varies periodically, with the maxima of intensity
that occurred at 2- to 3-day intervals during both

PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERIMENT

the first and second lunar days the experiment
was operational. A tendency exists for successive
peaks of type X activity to decline during each
lunar day. In figure 6-18, the highest peak of
type X activity is reached soon after the beginning of the second lunar day. Type T activity
is especially prominent during this second lunar
day. It increased to a maximum and then disappeared in the interval between sunrise and local
noon at Tranquility Base. Type T activity
appears to have ended completely approximately
24 hr before the end of the recording period.
Type X and I activities also appear to have
ended at this time.
None of these types of activity (types T, X,
and I ) seems to be related to instrument temperature. Neither the absolute temperature nor
the time derivative of the absolute temperature
appears to govern the seismic activity. Known
meteor streams do not appear to be related to
any of the most conspicuous peaks of intensity;
however, this possible relationship will be investigated further.
The possibility that some of the transient signals observed on the SP seismometer output are
produced by meteoroids striking the PSEP can
be examined. By applying the principle of conservation of momentum and using 10 kg as the
mass involved in the motion of the instrument
frame, 10 Hz as a representative signal frequency, 10 mpm as the maximum frame displacement (which is 20 percent of full scale
for maximum gain at 10 Hz), and 30 km/sec
as the velocity of the incoming meteoroid, a
value of 2 X
is obtained for the meteoroid
mass required to produce a transient signal of
the average observed amplitude ( 10 mpm, peakto-peak). The meteoroid mass required to produce the minimum detectable signal on the
seismometer at 10 Hz is approximately
g.
Using the meteoroid flux estimates of Hawkins
(ref. 6-l), approximately five meteoroid impacts
per day on the PSEP would produce seismic
motions of approximately 10 mpm. This value
is consistent with the hypothesis that type X
events may be produced by direct meteoroid
impacts on the PSEP.
At this point in the investigation, the following
possible source mechanisms for the observed
seismic signals are suggested:

157

( 1 ) Venting gases from the LM and PLSS's
and circulating fluids within the LM
( 2 ) Thermoelastic stress relief within the LM
and PSEP structures
( 3 ) Meteoroid impacts on the LM, the PSEP,
and the lunar surface
( 4 ) Displacement of rock material along steep
lunar slopes
( 5 ) Moonquakes
( 6 ) Instrumental effects
Feedback (Tidal) Outputs and Instrument
Temperature

Signals corresponding to the slowly varying
motion of each of the LP seismometers are
transmitted on separate data channels. The data
from these channels are referred to as feedback
or tidal outputs. Instrument sensitivity at these
outputs is sufficient to detect changes in gravity
(on the vertical component) and the associated
tilts of the lunar surface (on the horizontal components). In the PSEP, however, direct thermal
effects on the instrument platform and on the
spring of the LPZ seismometer were expected to
greatly exceed changes associated with lunar
tides. Internal instrument temperature was also
transmitted as a separate data channel.
Variations in the feedback signals and instrument temperature are plotted in figure 6-19 for
the total 21-day recording period. Step-function
discontinuities in these signals are produced
when the leveling and centering motors are in
operation. These discontinuities have been removed from the output signal; hence, the total
dynamic range of the seismometers is exceeded
in the plot. Total excursion of the vertical component was equivalent to approximately 142
mgal. The total range in tilt of the horizontalcomponent seismometers was 370 p a d for the
y-axis seismometer and 825 prad for the x-axis
seismometer. The expected peak-to-peak tidal
variations are approximately 1 arcsec (4.9 prad)
of tilt and 1 mgal of gravity. As had been expected, these signals are much too small, relative to thermally induced signals, to be observed.
As mentioned previously, the tilt variations are
produced by a combination of actual tilting of
the instrument platform in the lunar surface
material, tilting associated with thermal distor-

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

158

-

200

a

*-t-

July. 1969
I

I

I

I

30

60

90

120

August, 1969
I

150
Sun angle, deg

I

180

u
U)

60

FIGURE
6-19. -Variations in feedback signals and instrument temperature over the 21-day
recording period.

tions of the instrument platform, and direct
thermal effects on the elements of the seismometers and on the seismometer leveling systems.
Long-term variations in the LPZ seismometer
feedback signal are produced primarily by direct
thermal effects on the suspension spring.
Scientific Results

Perhaps the most important result of the PSEP
is the demonstration that it is possible to explore
another planet with the powerful tools of seismology. Despite the difficulty of interpreting
the data in the presence of the background
noises that resulted from the proximity of the
experiment to the LM, sufficient information has
been accumulated to show that greatly improved
data can be obtained from the first Apollo Lunar
Surface Experiments Package (ALSEP) by
making simple changes in the operating procedure. Specific improvements in operating procedure that should be made include the following:
( 1 ) The seismometer package must be moved
farther from the LM to reduce interfering noise
level caused by the LM.
( 2 ) The sensor must be removed from the
central station.

( 3 ) Better thermal control must be achieved.
( 4 ) Higher sensitivity must be sought.

All these improvements, except item ( 4 ) , were
planned for the Apollo l2 mission. Higher senrim
tivity of the seismic instruments must await the
design changes that the advanced ALSEP will
make possible.
Another important result of the PSEP is the
discovery that the background noise level on the
Moon is extremely low. Before these data were
obtained, the level of lunar background noise
was uncertain by several orders of magnitude.
According to one popular hypothesis, the large
diurnal thermal variations within the lunar surface material produced stresses that would lead
to spallation and fracture and, consequently, to
a high level of background noise. Another hypothesis proposed that meteoroid impacts were
sufficiently numerous to create a significant continuous noise level. Still another hypothesis cited
the absence of an atmosphere, oceans, and cultural activities to support the contention that
the background noise level on the Moon should
be much lower than the level on the Earth. The
PSEP indicated that the background seismicnoise levels on the Moon are extremely low, as
described in the following sections.

PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERIMENT
SP Background Seismic-Signal Level

A histogram of background seismic-signal
level which was recorded by the SP seismometer
for the first 9 lunar days of the experiment is
shown in figure 6-20. The high-amplitude signal
that occurs immediately after turnon is produced
partly by astronaut activities and partly by signals that are tentatively attributed to the LM.
These levels decreased steadily over a period of
8 days. After 8 days, occasional activity, as discussed in the section entitled "Description of
Recorded Seismic Signal," was observed. Thus,
the continuous background seismic signal near
1 Hz is less than 0.3 mpm, which corresponds to
system noise. Maximum signal levels of 1.2 pm
at frequencies of 7 to 8 Hz were observed during
the period when the astronauts were on the
surface.
LP Vertical-Component Seismometer

Except for the occasional occurrence of transient signals of instrumental origin, the background seismic-signal level on the LPZ seismometer is below system noise, that is, below 0.3
mpm over the period range from 1 to 10 sec.
This level is between 100 and 10 000 times less
than average background levels observed on
Earth in the normal period range for microseisms
( 6 to 8 sec).
LP Horizontal-Component Seismometers

Continuous seismic background signals of extremely small amplitudes (10 to 30 mpm, peakto-peak) were observed on the records from the
two LP horizontal-component seismometers. The
amplitude of these signals decreased considerably for a 2- to 3-day interval near lunar noon,
when the rate of change of external temperature
with time is at a minimum. The signals are very
low frequency with periods of from 20 sec to
2 min. It is assumed that these signals correspond to the tilting of the instruments caused
by a combination of thermal distortions of the
metal pallet, which serves as the base of the
seismometer, and a rocking motion of the pallet
in the lunar surface material. The rocking motion
could also be produced by thermal effects. However, the horizontal component of true lunar
seismic-signal background level at shorter peri-

159

ods (less than 10 sec) also appears to be less
than 0.3 mpm. The character of the background
signals on the LP seismometers is shown in
figure 6-5.
Of the many signals that have been recorded,
at least some were produced by the LM. Many
signals may be of natural origin; that is, they
may have been generated by moonquakes, impacts, or movement of surface rocks. However,
none of the observed signals has the pattern
normally observed in recordings of seismic
activity on Earth (with the possible exception
of signals produced by local volcanic events and
by landslides). Distinct phases corresponding
to the various types of waves are not apparent
in any of the recorded seismic signals, and most
wave trains are of long duration. The high sensitivity at which the PSEP instruments were operated would have resulted in detection of many
distinctive seismic events if the Moon were as
seismically active as the Earth and if lunar rocks
transmitted seismic waves as effectively as do
Earth rocks. The fact that a large number of
unmistakable seismic events were not observed
during 21 days of operation is a major scientific
result. To describe this observation, it is convenient to introduce the term "seismic receptivity.''
Seismic receptivity is a measure of the overall effectiveness with which seismic waves are
generated, transmitted, and detected at any
given point for any given body. The seismic
receptivity is the product of involving ( 1 ) the
seismicity of the body, that is, the rate of seismic
energy release, ( 2 ) the transmissibility of the
medium through which the waves propagate,
and ( 3 ) the level of background seismic noise
at the sensor location.
The background seismic noise of the Moon
(for the sensor at Tranquility Base) is low. This
low background level results in high seismic
receptivity for the sensor. The problem to be
attacked by analysis of the data already obtained
and data expected from future missions is to
determine the extent to which each of two factors, seismicity and transmissibility, is responsible for the small number of distinctive seismic
events that have been recorded.
Among the possible explanations of low seis-

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

160

IcTurnon

July 21, 1969
LM ascent

-.--

Scale change

July 22, 1969

5-

July 26. 1969

0

51

-

0

*
.
-

I
-

-'

-

1

July 27, 1969

July 28, 1969

I-

Time, hr

FIGURE
6-20. -Histogram of signal level from the SP seismometer. A 1-mm trace amplitude
equals 1.9 mpm for the predominant signal component (8 Hz).

*

161

PASSIVE SEISMIC EXPERIMENT

mic receptivity are the heterogeneity of lunar
material, which would scatter the seismic waves;
a low-Q (where Q is the transmissibility quality
factor) interior, which would absorb seismic
waves; and an inability of the lunar material to
store high stress. Low seismicity, if confirmed by
future missions, would imply the absence of tectonic processes within the Moon such as those
associated with major crustal movements on
Earth.
One hypothesis that could explain the observations is that the body of the Moon is very
heterogeneous, at least in its outer regions. The
near-surface material is certainly heterogeneous
in character, as evidenced by the great numbers
of visible craters and surface fractures. This
heterogeneity may extend deep into the body of
the Moon. The scattering of seismic waves that
would occur in propagation through a highly
heterogeneous material would tend to increase
the duration of the observed seismic wave and
to suppress the appearance of distinct phases
within the wave train. The PSEP station was in
one of the mare regions, which are thought to
be great lakes of solidified lava. If this hypothesis is true, the maria would be expected to be
among the most homogeneous regions of the
Moon. However, since the original formation of
the maria, meteoroid impacts may have converted
these structures to rubble. If the age of Mare
Tranquillitatis is as great as first reSults indicate
(discussed in chapter 5), the process of fracturing by impact may have proceeded to a very
great extent. Much of the visible evidence for
such fracturing may be hidden by the overlying
blanket of fragmental material. However, it
should be noted that nothing in the present
observations precludes the possibility of a hightemperature (low-Q) lunar interior. This would
also contribute to low seismic receptivity.
With one lunar seismic station, one should not
expect to do effective seismology on the Moon,
unless the Moon were similar to the Earth, with
an abundance of natural seismic sources, and
unless the signals were similar in character to
those observed on Earth, so that one could draw
by analogy on Earth experience. Neither of these
two criteria appears to have been met. Seismic
experiments, nevertheless, will lead eventually

to answers to questions concerning the strncture
and dynamics of the Moon. Results will come
more slowly than had been hoped, and there
will be greater dependence upon the establishment of a network of stations and use of artificial
sources.
Meteoroid impacts are a major factor in shaping the lunar surface. Determination of the size
and frequency distribution of meteoroid impacts
is necessary to estimate quantitatively the rates
of crater formation and erosion. A store of information, begun with the PSEP data, will be
uniquely suited to the study of this problem.
Two important implications that will affect
future seismic experiments emerge from the preliminary analysis of the PSEP data. The effectiveness of the use of moonquakes for investigation of deep lunar structure is low, despite the
high sensitivity of the seismometers used. However, the low background noise observed demonstrates that greater sensitivity can be used.
The effectiveness of the present instrumentation
will be greatly enhanced when a planned network of three ALSEP stations is operable. Even
if the seismicity of the Moon is considerably less
than that of the Earth, this network can reasonably be expected to record several significant
lunar seismic events. Data from even a single
well-recorded lunar seismic event could be sufficient to determine major structural features of
the Moon. Also, even if the Moon has an extremely low seismicity, probing of the deep lunar
interior by use of artificial sources, such as the
impacts of a Saturn IVB stage and the LM ascent
stage, is a strong possibility.
The low seismic-noise level measured by the
PSEP indicates that the major modification
needed in the advanced ALSEP is increased
sensitivity of the seismometer system. Increased
sensitivity may compensate for the apparent low
seismicity of the Moon to the extent that moonquakes can be as effective for investigation of
deep lunar structure as earthquakes are for study
of the interior of the Earth.
Reference
6-1. HAWKINS,
GERALD The Meteor Population, ReS.:
search Report No. 3. NASA CR-51365, August
1963.

7. Laser Ranging Retroreflector
C. 0. Alley, P: L. Bender, R. F. Chang, D. G. Currie, R. H. Dicke, J. E. Faller,
W. M. Kaula, G. J. F. MacDonald, J. D. Mulholland, Z .H. Plotkin, S. K. Poultney,
1
D. T. Wilkinson, Zrvin Winer, Walter Carrion, Tom Johnson, Paul Spadin, Lloyd
Robinson, E. Joseph Wampler, Donald Wieber, E. Silverberg, C. Steggerda, J. Mullendore, J. Rayner, W. Williams, Brian Warner, Harvey Richardson, and B. Bopp

Concept of the Experiment

The compact array of high-precision optical
retroreflectors (cube corners) deployed on the
Moon is intended to serve as a reference point in
measuring precise ranges betwen the array and
points on the Earth by using the technique of
short-pulse laser ranging. The atmospheric fluctuations in the index of refraction prevent a laser
beam from being smaller than approximately 1
mile in diameter at the Moon. The curvature of
the lunar surface results in one side of the short
pulse being reflected before the other side, producing a reflected pulse measured in microseconds, even if the incident pulse is measured in
nanoseconds. The retroreflector array eliminates
this spreading because of the small size of the
array. (The maximum spreading of a pulse because of optical libration tipping of the array will
be approximately 20.125 nsec.) In addition, the
retroreflective property causes a much larger
amount of light to be directed back to the telescope from the array than is reflected from the
entire surface area illuminated by the laser
beam.
The basic uncertainty in measuring the approximately 2.5-sec round-trip travel time is associated with the performance of photomultipliers at the single photoelectron level. This
uncertainty is estimated to be approximately
1 nsec. When the entire system is calibrated and
the effects of the atmospheric delay are calculated from local temperature, pressure, and
humidity measurements and subtracted from the
travel time, where the uncertainty in this correction is estimated to be less than 0.5 nsec, an

overall uncertainty of r+15 cm in one-way range
seems achievable.
With the +15-cm uncertainty, monitoring the
changes in point-to-point distances from Earth
to the lunar reflector (by daily observations for
many years) will produce new information on
the dynamics of the Earth-Moon system. The
present uncertainty of three parts in lo7 in the
knowledge of the velocity of light will not affect
the scientific aims of the experiment, since it
is the practice to measure astronomical distances
in light travel time. Primary scientific objectives include the study of gravitation and relativity (secular variation in the gravitational constant), the physics of the Earth (fluctuation in
rotation rate, motion of the pole, large-scale
crustal motions), and the physics of the Moon
(physical librations, center-of-mass motion, size
and shape). Some of these objectives are discussed in references 7-1 to 7 4 . Estimates made
by P. L. Bender of improvements expected in
some of these categories are shown in tables 7-1
to 7-111.
Properties of the Laser Ranging Retroreflector

Although the Laser Ranging Retroreflector
(LRRR) is simple in concept, the detailed design of a device that would satisfy the stated
scientific aims has received much attention. The
primary design problem has been to avoid systematic gaps in ranging data expected to result
from the extreme variation in thermal conditions on the Moon (from full Sun illumination
to lunar night). A preliminary design based on
discussions among various members of the investigator group and optical engineers was put

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

TABLE
7-1.

Lunar orbital data parameters
Present accuracy
(approximate)

Quantity

1.5-m range
uncertainty
Accuracy

Mean distance

0.15-m range
uncertainty"

Time, yr

500 m

250 m

Eccentricity

1x 10-

4 x lo-$

1

Angular position of Moon with respect to perigee
Angular position of Moon with respect to Sun

2x105 ~ 1 0 - ~

4 x lo-'
4 ~ 1 0 - ~

Accrrracy

1

1
1

Time necessary to check predictions of Brans-Dicke
scalar-tensor gravitational theory, yr

-

25

25

Time, yr

75 m
25 m
1.5~10-~
4x
1.5~10-~
1.5 x
4x

0.5
1
.5
1
.5
.5
1

8

8

"Three observing stations are assumed for periods longer than 0.5 yr.

TABLE
7-11.

Lunar libration and relation of Laser Ranging Retroreflector (LRRR) to center of mass
Present accc~racy
(approximate)

Quantity

Libration parameters:
p = (C-A)/B

0.15-m range
uncertainty=

1.5-m range
uncertainty
Accuracy

Time, yr

1
x

3 ~ 1 0 - ~

4

5 ~ 1 0 - ~

2 ~ 1 0 - ~

1.5

500 m

250 m

1

Xz

200 m

70 m

x
3

200 m

50 m

Accuracy

7 = (B-A)/C
Coordinates of LRRR with respect to
center of mass:
XI

Time, yr

3x
3x
1 . 5 l~ - G
o
2 x lo-7

0.5
4
.5
1.5

1

75 m
25 m
40 m

3

50 m

.5
1
.5
1
.5
3

7m
5m
"Three observing stations are assumed for periods longer than 0.5 yr.

TABLE
7-111.

Geophysical data determinable from LRRR

Quantity

Rotation period of Earth, sec
Distance of station from axis of rotation, m
Distance of station from equatorial plane,= m
Motion of the pole,= m
East-west continental drift rate observable in 5 yr," cm/yr
Time for observing predicted 10-cm/yr drift of Hawaii
toward Japan," yr

Present accuracy
(estimated)

5x

1.5-m range
uncertainty

lox 10-

10
20
1to 2
30 to 60

3
6 to 20b
1.5
30

15 to 30

15

0.15-m range
uncertainty

1x

0.3
0.6 to 2b
0.15
3
1.5

" Three or more observing stations are required.
Depending upon the latitude of the station.

forth by J. E. Faller in a proposal to NASA (ref.
7-5).
The first financial support provided by NASA
was used to test the proposed design, which consisted of small solid-corner reflectors made of

homogeneous fused silica. The test and evaluation
facilities at the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center were used to simulate the lunar environment.
These tests verified that a metal coating could not
be used on the reflectors and showed that the

165

LASER RANGING RETROREFLECTOR

failure of total internal reflection at off-axis
angles posed serious problems in mounting the
reflectors to maintain small temperature gradients during larger off-axis Sun angles (ref. 7-6).

The tests verified the predicted performance during lunar night and during direct Sun illumination within the total internal reflection region of
angles.
The efforts of thermal and mechanical design
engineers in close association with members of
the investigator group solved the problems and
led to the design shown in figure 7-1. The corner
reflectors are lightly mounted on tapered tabs
between Teflon rings, and are recessed by onehalf their diameter into cylindrical cavities in a
solid aluminum block. The predicted optical performance, based on thermal analyses under changing lunar conditions, is shown in figure 7-2.
The need for careful pointing of the LRRR
toward the center of the Earth libration pattern
is shown by figure 7-3, which displays the offaxis response of the recessed corner reflectors.
(The curve is the result of averaging over azimuthal orientation and polarization dependence.)
The motion of the Earth in the lunar sky because
of the optical librations of the Moon is shown in
figure 7 4 for the period July to October 1969.
The alinement in the east-west direction

, A l u m i n u m retainer r i n g

, Upper
,

Teflon

.-...''mounting ring
-------- Fused
retroreflector

'
,
' Lower

Teflon
mounting

Inside surface of cavity ,'

FIGURE - Comer reflector mounting.
7-1.

.51
9

I

8

I

I

7

6

I

5

I

I

4

3

I

I

I

I

100

80

60

40

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

1
0
1
2
Before-+After
Time from local noon, Earth days

3

4

5

6

7

8

I

I

2

I

M

I

I

I

I

0
20
E 4 W
S u n angle from zenith, deg

I

I

I

I

40

60

80

100

FIGURE -Predicted optical performance as a function of Sun angle, from thermal
7-2.
analysis.

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

166

*----Average response employed i n calculation
a
L

a
,
U

u
N
a
,

. .4co
=
0

z .3-

.2-

.II

0

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

0, deg

FIGURE7-3. Average off-axis performance of recessed
circular corner reflectors.

This excellent pointing means that the return
will not fall to extremely low values during the
extremes of the libration cycle. With the previous
information included, the relative expected response from July 20 to September g, lg69, is
shown in figure 7-5. Figure 7-5 is an upper
bound for the performance expected.
The flight hardware is shown in figure 7-6.
The gnomon, the alinement marks, and the bubble level are clearly shown. In figure 7-7, the
LRRR is shown deployed on the Moon.
In tests, each corner reflector which was selected for the flight array exhibited an on-axis
diffraction performance greater than 90 percent
of that possible for a corner reflector having no
geometrical or homogeneity defects. The on-axis,
nondistorted performance is conveniently characterized by a differential scattering cross section.

1

I

5 X 10" cmz/steradian

which yields the number by which the photon
flux density (photons per square centimeter)
incident on the reflector array must be multiplied to give the number of photons per steradian
intercepted by the telescope receiver. The cross
section includes the effect of velocity aberration
and is evaluated for a wavelength of 6943 A.
Observations of returns on August 1 and 3,
1969 (immediately before lunar sunset), and on

E-+W
Longitude, deg

FIGURE7-4. - Optical librations for the period July to
October 1969.

achieved by Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was
within the width of a division on the compass
mark. The leveling was within O.SO, with the
bubble oriented toward the southwest. When
combined with the worst possible mechanical
tolerances of construction, the east-west alinement is r+0.7O, and the overall pointing is
within lo of the center of the libration pattern.

.1
1
I
,
I
,
Jul 22 J u l 29 Aug 5 Aug 12 Aug 19 Aug 26 Sep 2
1969

-

I

Sep 9

FIGURE
7-5. Upper bound of LRRR efficiency as a function of time.

167

LASER RANGING RETROREFLECTOR

?
August 20, 1969 (immediately after lunar sunrise), show that the mounting (designed to minimize temperature gradients at these large Sun
abgles) has been successful. Observations of returns on September 3 and 4, 1969 (during lunar
night), confirm the expectation that the reflector
would perform at very low temperatures and
that the differential thermal contractions of the
mount and corners do not produce large strains.
The survival of the reflectors throughout a lunar
night has been demonstrated. Performance degradation, if any, caused by the presence of debris
during lunar module (LM) ascent does not appear to be severe.
Ground Station Design

A single telescope can be used both as a transmitter and a receiver because the large diffraction pattern resulting from the 3.8-cm-diameter

FIGURE -The LRRR before stowage in the scien7-6.
equipment bay.

corner reflectors (the central spot has a diameter
on the Earth of approximately 10 miles) allows
for a velocity aberration displacement of approximately 1 mile without significant loss of signal.
This was one of the major considerations in the
design of the LRRR array discussed previously.
The 2.5-sec light travel time between transmitting and receiving readily allows the mechanical
insertion of a mirror that directs the returning
photons collected by the telescope into a photomultiplier detector.
The present beam divergence of short-pulse,
high-energy ruby lasers requires the use of a
large aperture to recollimate the beam so that
the beam is narrowed to match the divergence
allowed by the atmospheric fluctuations of the

168

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE - The LRRR deployed on the Moon.
7-7.
index of refraction - typically several seconds of
arc. Astronomers refer to this effect as "seeing." The degree of atmospheric turbulence at
an observatory at a given time thus determines
the size of the laser beam on the lunar surface,
producing a spread of approximately 2 km per
sec of arc divergence.
Techniques for pointing such narrow beams to
a specific location on the Moon were developed

during the successful Surveyor 7 laser-beampointing tests (ref. 7-7). An argon-ion laser beam
was brought to a focus in the telescope focal
plane at the Moon-image spot that was chosen
for illumination. When the laser beam filled the
exit pupil of the telescope and matched the
f-number, the collimated beam was projected
to the selected location on the Moon and detected by the television camera on the Surveyor

LASER RANGING RETROREFLECTOR

7. For the Apollo laser ranging experiment, the
beam is matched into the telescope by using a
diverging lens, because it is not possible to focus
high-power ruby laser beams in air without
causing electrical breakdown. The direction of
the projected beam is monitored by intercepting
a small portion of the beam with corner reflectors
mounted on the secondary mirror-support structure. These reflectors return the intercepted light
in such a manner that the light is brought to
focus, superimposed on the image of the Moon,
at the spot to which the beam is being sent. A
beam splitter coated with a highlv damage- ,
resistant, multilayer dielectric coating reflects the
laser beam into the telescope and transmits the
image of the Moon and the laser light intercepted by the telescope comer reflectors into
the guiding system (ref. 7-8).
A view of the region of the Moon around
Tranquility Base is shown in figure 7-8, which
was taken through the guiding eyepiece of the
McDonald Observatory 107-in. telescope. The
reticle marks used to guide from craters are
clearly shown, along with the intercepted laser
light. In final alinement, the small circle is made
to coincide with both Tranquility Base and the

-

169

FIGURE - Lick Observatory, University of California,
7-9.
at

FIGURE
7-10. - Lick Observatory 120-in, telescope dome.

FIGURE7-8. -View through guiding eyepiece of the
McDonald Observatory 107-in. telescope during process of alinement.

center of the laser spot. The large size of the
laser spot is caused by imperfections in the
telescope corner reflectors, not by beam divergence. The diameter of the reticIe circle is approximately 3.6 seconds of arc. Many craters are
not resolved because of poor seeing conditions
at the time the photograph was made.
Figures 7-9 to 7-14 are views of the Lick Observatory, University of California, at Mount
Hamilton, California; the Lick Observatory 120in. telescope, the second largest in the world;
the McDonald Observatory, University of Texas,
at Mount Locke, Tex.; and the McDonald Observatory 107-in. telescope, the third largest in
the world. Lasers were mounted in a stationary
position at a coudt5 focus of each instrument.
The Lick Observatory participated in the acquisition phase of the experiment to increase

170

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

FIGURE
7-11. - Lick Observatorv 120-in. telesco~e.
FIGURE
7-13. - McDonald Observatory 107-in. telescope.

turns were observed on August 20, September 3,
September 4, and September 22,1969, at the McDonald Observatory.

Observations at the Lick Observatory
System A

7-12, - McDonald Observatory, University of
FIGURE
Texas, at Mount Locke, Tex.

the probability of getting early returns because
the weather and seeing there are generally excellent in the summer. Returns at the Lick Observatory, which is no longer in operation, were observed on August 1 and 3, 1969. The McDonald
Observatory is equipped to make daily range
measurements, weather permitting, for years. Re-

The ranging system at the Lick Observatory
consisted of a giant-pulse, high-powered ruby
laser (operated at the coudk focus) which was
optically coupled through the 120-in. telescope
and could be fired at 30-sec intervals. The angular diameter of the outgoing beam was approximately 2 seconds of arc and made a spot of light
on thk Moon approximately 2 miles in diameter.
The return signal was detected by a photomultiplier that was mounted at the coudk focus behind a 10-second-of-arc field stop and a narrow
(0.7 A ) filter, which were used to reduce the
background illumination from the sunlit Moon.
A time-delay generator (TDG), initiated by the
firing of the laser, was used to activate the
acquiring electronics approximately 2.5 sec (the
Earth-Moon round-trip time for light) later. The

LASER RANGING RETHOREFLECTOR

FIGURE - Optical path in the McDonald Observatory 107-in, telescope.
7-14.

delay generator was set for each shot by using
the LE 16 ephemeris. (See the section of this
report entitled "The Lunar Ephemeris: Predictions and Preliminary Results.")
Following the pulse produced by the TDG,
the output pulses from the photomultiplier were
channeled sequentially into 12 binary scalers.
Each scaler channel had a dwell time that was
adjustable from 0.25 to 4 psec (ref. 7-8). The
routing of the pulses to the scalers was such that
a pulse arriving within 0.1 psec of the end of a
channel would also add a count to the following

channel. The scalers then contained a quantized
summary of the detector output for a short time
interval centered on the expected arrival time
of the reflected signal. After each scaler cycling
following a laser firing, a small online computer
read the contents and reset the scalers. The computer stored the accumulated count for each of
the scalers and provided a printed output and
a cathode-ray-tube display of the data.
Scattered sunlight from the lunar surface produced a random background that slowly filled
the 12 time channels. Because the return from

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINALRY SCIENCE REPORT
1

172

the retroreflector occurred with a predetermined
delay, the channel that corresponded in time to
the arrival of the signal accumulated data at a
faster rate than the other 12 channels. Figure
7-15 illustrates this point by showing the way in
which the data actually accumulated during run
18. Following acquisition on the night of August
1, 1969, 169 shots were fired. Range gate errors
occurred on 27 shots, and 22 shots were fired
with the telescope pointed away from the reflector. For the remaining 120 shots, approximately 100 above-background counts were received. These results represent a return expectation in excess of 80 percent and show that all
parts of the experiment operated satisfactorily.
Assuming a Poisson distribution of the recorded
photoelectrons, the returns correspond to an
5 shots

10 shots

15 shots

7

20 shots

ro

a
,

U
U
1

I

I

I

I
2
3
4
Behind
Time relative to predicted time, psec

5

I

I

I

1

l

2

I

I

1
0
Ahead --I-+

average of 1.6 detectable photoelectrons per
shot. This number is a lower limit to the true
average because interference effects and guiding
errors probably reduced the number of returns
that were recorded. The strength of this signal
and the lack of "spill" into adjacent channels
clearly show that the signal did not come from
the "natural" lunar surface, from which the
return would be distributed over approximately
8 psec. The timing of the trigger from the TDG
relative to Mulholland's ephemeris was changed
three times, and the channel widths were decreased from 2 to 1 psec and then to 0.5 psec.
After each change, the signal appeared in the
appropriate channel. The data from runs 10 to
21, the interval from the first acquisition to the
close of operation, are shown in table 7-IV.
Nine runs containing 162 shots were made before
acquisition.
Figure 7-16 shows a plot of the data taken
from table 7-IV. Runs 12 and 14 have not been
plotted in figure 7-16 because errors in setting
the TDG invalidated the timing. During run 19,
the telescope was not pointed at the reflector,
and no returns were seen. Because of a fortuitous
splitting of the return between two channels on
two runs, an effective timing precision of 0.1
psec was achieved. This precision is equivalent
to a range error of approximately 15 m. In figure
7-16 an apparent drift in the time the returns
were detected, relative to Mulholland's predictions, is shown. The drift was caused by the 120in. telescope being located approximately 524 m
east of the locations given for the Lick Observatory in the American Ephemeris and Nautical
Almanac. A curve showing this correction to the
original ephemeris is given in figure 7-16. Translation of this curve along the ordinate is allowable, and the amount of time gives the difference
between the observed range and the predicted
range. When the correct coordinates are used,
the observations agree with the predicted curve.

l

3

l

4

l

I

~

5
6
7
8
Channel number

l

l

l

l

l

9 1 0 1 1 1 2

FIGURE
7-15. - Histogram showing the growth of the
retroreflected signal in channel 6.

Sysfern B

The primary function of acquisition system B
at the Lick Observatory was to locate the deployed LRRR in range and position. System B
was not intended to satisfy the long-term objectives of the lunar ranging experiment; however,

J

LASER RANGING RETROREFLECTOR

TABLE
7-IV.

Log of observation data showing acquisition

Total counts
Run

Channel
1

10
1
1
12
13
14
'15
16
17
18
'19
'20
21

2

3

4

12
12
(c)
13

8
12
(4
8

16
12
(4
8
(c)
3
2
4
3
3
1
2

18
11
(c)
12

(4 (4
4
1
6
3
3
2
5

3
1
3
1
3
1
2

(4
5
2
2
5
10
0
3

5

6

7

8

9

12 14 10 17
6 13 11
1
1
( 4 (c) ( 4 (c)
7 b18 11
5
(c) (4 (c) ( 4
4 b17 6
8
b6
3
1
3
"11 "9
7
2
3 "19
3
3
4
2
3
5
3
4 "6
2
2
1 b12 "11

1

0

1

13 "27
14 "26
(c) (4
6
7
(c) (c)
10
5
2
1
2
4
1
4

5

5

4
3

2
4

1

12
10

(4
8
(4
6
3
2
0
8
2
5

1

2

7.
shots

12
14
(4
12
(c)
8
2
5
4
5
4
2

20
14
16
13
6
18
10
16
22
22
10
22

u.t.

for middle

$
;;
10:21
10:32

-

11:04

-

11:23
11:36
11:45
12:03
12:19
12:23
12:45

Time
o f first
chnnneln
ksec

C:ze'
w,e,

2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.o
1.0
.5
.5
.5

-20

.5

-1
-1
-1

.5
.5

-20

-10
- 10

-10
-5
-1
-1
-1

"With respect to ephemeris predictions.
Channel in which return was expected.
" Range-gate errors invalidated data.
'Data from three shots with erroneous range gates deleted from tabulation.
Telescope pointed 16 km south of reflector.
'Thin clouds noted near Moon.

System B was designed to be a sensitive, moderately precise, semiautomatic, high-repetition
rate system using existing off-the-shelf equipment
wherever possible.
System B was composed of several essentially
independent subsystems. These subsystems were
the laser-transmitter/power-supply assembly, the
receiver-detector ranging system, the range gate
generator and data control and recorder system,
and the time standard system.
The laser transmitter uses oscillator and amplifier heads employing a conventional rotatingprism, bleachable-absorber, "Q-switch mechanism. The oscillator and amplifier heads are identical and use 110-mm-long, IBmm-diameter
Brewster-Brewster rubies. An existing laser system that was modified for this program was
capable of operation at 10 J at 3-sec intervals
with a pulse width of 60 to 80 nsec.
For operation at the Lick Observatory, modification of the laser system required the incorporation of all normal transmit-receive ranging
functions and of a boresight capability onto the
laser case. An optical-mechanical assembly (fig.
7-17) was designed to be attached to the laser
case. The exiting laser beam passed through a
beam splitter, which was oriented at Brewster's
angle for minimum reflection of horizontally

polarized light. The small fraction of light scattered or reflected from the beam splitter was
detected by an FW 114A biplanar photodiode.
The output of the photodiode was used for the
range measurement initiation pulse and for
monitoring the operation of the laser. The beam
splitter was also used to couple a vertically
polarized helium-neon laser beam along the same
axis as the ruby beam. A helium-neon laser was
mounted parallel to the ruby laser, and the resultant beam was expanded by a small autocollimator and then reflected by a mirror mounted
parallel to the beam splitter. The reflected beam
was then rereflected by the beam splitter along
the laser axis. The laser produced an elliptical
cross-section beam that was corrected and expanded to 50 mm in diameter by the Brewster
entrance prism telescope. The 50-mm exit beam
was reflected at right angles onto a 50-mm-aperture F39 lens that was positioned at the appropriate place with respect to the coudB focus of
the 120-in. telescope optical system.
The returning energy follou~sessentially the
same path as the transmitted energy. A flip mirror, actuated by a small solenoid, reflects the
returning signal after the signal is passed through
the correcting telescope to a field-limiting lens
and aperture. The aperture in the field-limiting

174

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE
7-16. - Three-dimensional figure showing the
time of the run ( abscissa), the range window during
which the equipment was open for receiving data
(ordinate), and the number of counts in each channel
(width of the bar). It is clear that in each run in
which returns were expected they were seen in the
correct channel. During run 19 (third from right-hand
end), the telescope was pointed away from the reflector, and no returns were seen.

system is sized for a 10-second-of-arc field of
view in space. Light passing through the aperture is collimated and passed through a 2.7-A
bandpass filter. The light is divided into two
equal beams by a , dividing prism; then, the
beams of light enter the enhancement prism on
each of the two photomultipliers.
Two detectors (operating in coincidence) and
a range gate were used to eliminate as much
extraneous background noise as possible. Type
56 TVP photomultipliers used enhancement
prisms to allow multiple reflection of the entrance light from the photocathode. The output
of each photomultiplier tube was discriminated
and shaped with an EGG T105/N dual discriminator. Because theoretical considerations indicate
that only a few photoelectrons occur for each

transmitted pulse, the discriminator was used to
stretch each detected pulse by the length of the
transmitted pulse. A coincidence overlap equal
to the transmitted pulse duration was necessary
because, lacking discrimination, a photoelectron
from each photomultiplier tube could be related
to any time within the transmitted pulse duration. The outputs of the discriminators were
AND'ed in the EGG C102B/N coincidence
module.
The actual range measurement (fig. 7-18) was
made with a 1-nsec time-interval counter. The
time-interval counter was started by the photodiode output each time the Iaser transmitter
operated. The discriminators and the stop channel of the time-interval unit were disabled by the
range gate until the expected time of arrival of
the reflected laser pulse. If both photomultiplier
tubes detected a photoelectron within the coincidence resolving time of the EGG C102B/N, the
output would stop the time-interval unit.
The photodiode signal was used in two other
measurements. First, the signal was used to stop
a 100-psec-resolution time-interval unit that was
started by the "ontime" timing signal from the
real-time clock. This measurement determined
the time, to the nearest 100 psec, of the range
measurement. The pulse was also converted,
monitoring the overall performance of the laser
during the operation.
System B was controlled and operated by a
special digital logic assembly. This device (fig.
7-19) generated laser fire signals and the range
gate window, sampled all measurement devices
for information, and recorded the information.
One of the most important aspects of the operation is the generation of the range gate window,
based on knowledge of where the retroreflectors
should be. Furthermore, because this information
may not be as accurate as required, it is necessary to change the information essentially in
real time. The range gate window was generated
with an externally, as well as manually, programed delay pulse generator. The programed
input for the delay pulse generator was obtained
from a lunar prediction drive tape containing
the expected round-trip time interval to the lunar
surface for every 3 sec of time. A digital comparison between the command time on the tape
and real time was made to maintain the tape in

LASER RANGING RETROREFLECTOR

Enhancement prism'
laser

3-Abandpass filter

Collimator

Field stop

Ruby laser transmitter

V

50-mm diameter

\-

1

FIGURE7-17. - Optical schematic of system B at Lick Observatory.

synchronization with real time. The range information on the tape was then stored and transferred to the delay pulse generator prior to each
laser firing. The laser firing started the delay
pulse generator; and after the predicted delay,
a pulse initiated the range-gate-window pulse
generator. The range-gate-window length was
variable and was used to enable the detector discriminators and the range time-interval unit at
the time a return signal was expected.
The measured data were recorded with a
multiplexing data gate and standard line printer.
The control section generatkd print commands
for each series of measurements at the correct
time during the Ssec cycle period. The control
section obtained timing signals from the time
standard rack (fig. 7-20). Real time was maintained to an accuracy of A10 psec during the
operation, by comparing signals from the Loran
C chain with the real-time clock using the Loran
C synchronization generator.
The system was operated for a period of 1 hr
and 45 min on the morning of August 3, 1969,
during which the laser was fired 1230 times.

The total number of apparent measured ranges
during this period was 98. The low number of
returns relative to the number of transmitted
pulses is related to a slight ( 2 sec of arc) misalinement in the detector optical system and
to the failure of the delay pulse generator to
operate in the externally programed mode. Furthermore, because returns were not immediately
recognized, an angle search was made over a
longer time period.
The measured range time could have three
possible sources: a return from the retroreflector,
a return from the lunar surface, or random noise
coincidence from reflected sunlight and background. Statistically, 35 to 50 noise coincidences
and approximately 30 lunar surface ranges would
be expected in 1200 firings. Because the numbers
agree, within acceptable limits, with the total
number measured, it is not obvious that returns
from the retroreflectors were measured. However, any returns from the retroreflectors should
fall within the precision of the system or within
100 nsec with respect to the true range to the
package.

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

176

Start

"On time"
pulse
Transmitter
beam
sampler

energy

One-half
received
energy

b

100 - psec
delay - t i m e
interval u n i t

-+ P r i n t e r

Transmitter
power
measurement

1 percent
transmitted

Printer
gates

gates

Detector 1
enhanced

*

I

6

Printer
gates

I
I

--u'
,
One-half
received
energy

Detector 2
enhanced

I

I

I
Range gate window

Coincidence
module

Dual channel discriminator

L-----_I--A

FIGURE - Receiver and ranging section.
7-18.
The observed range time measurements were
compared arithmetically with the predicted range
time and then linearly corrected because of a
known parallax error. The parallax error occurred because a different site was used for the
range predictions. The linear correction was
performed by taking the initial range residuals
and fitting (in a least squares sense) a first-order
polynomial to the residuals. Then, only those
residuals occurring within a certain range of the
polynomial were used to redefine the polynomial.
This technique was used successively three times
to generate a polynomial about which 1 of the
1
measured ranges had a root mean square of 45
nsec. Furthermore, because of the parallax error,
the coefficients of the polynomial agree with the
expected deviations from the predicted range.
The range residuals corrected to this linear
equation were used to construct a histogram (fig.
7-21) with 100-nsec intervals from -5 to + 5

psec. The data lying outside of the 2 5 p e c
were not displayed because no interval contained
more than one point and because no significant
bunching was observed. The histogram clearly
shows a central peak that cannot be supported
by any statistical interpretation other than one
assuming returns from the retroreflector.
Observations at the McDonald Observatory

The laser in use presently is a custom-built
two-stage pockels-cell switched ruby system.
Typical operating conditions were as follows:
( 1 ) Energy: 7 J
( 2 ) Pulse width: 20 nsec
( 3 ) Beam divergence: 2.4 mrad (measured at
full energy points)
(4) Repetition rate: once every 6 sec
( 5 ) Wavelength: 6943.0 t 0.2 A at 70° F
( 6 ) Amplifier rod diameter: 0.75 in.

LASER RANGING HETRORGFLECTOR

I

Fire laser

I
Control section

Operate transmitreceive switch

+I

Range

I

Time

+

I
Predicted range
time interval

Range gate
window to
power
measurement
and time
interval unit

+

time of day

I
Line printer

Transmitter
power

1

Print commands

VS

I

Data print gates ,

Timing-control signals

F
i

Tape reader

co;!zor
registor

I

1

1

Digital time

I
Range gate
window
and bias

I/

I

I

I I

+

(real time)

1-MHz
from
timing rack

Predicted
range
time

I

Delay pulse
generator

Laser transmitter oulse

7

1-

Manual range in

1 MHz

FIGURE
7-19. - Range gate generator and data control.
The detector package contained a photomultiplier that had a measured quantum efficiency of
5 percent at 6943 angstroms and a dark current
of 80 000 counts per second. When cooled by
dry ice (as during ranging operations), the dark
current was 10 000 counts per second. Spectral
filters with widths of 3 and 0.7 A were available.
Both filters were temperature controlled. Pinholes restricting the field of view of the telescope
to 6" or 9" were commonly used. An air-driven
protective shutter was closed during the time of
laser firing, opening for approximately 1 sec
around the time for receiving returns. The net
efficiency of the whole receiver, ratio of photoelectrons produced to photons entering the telescope aperture (with a 3-A filter), including
telescope optics, was measured to be 0.5 percent,
using starlight from Vega.
The block diagram of the timing electronics
used during the acquisition period is shown in

figure 7-22. The electronics consist of a multistop
time-to-pulse-height converter (MSTPHC) for
coarse range search covering an interval of 30
psec with 0.8psec bins (ref. 7-8) in addition to
the core circuits forming part of the intended
subnanosecond timing system. The initial and
final vernier circuits of this system were not in
use. The range prediction provided by J. D. Mulholland was recorded on magnetic tape at 6-sec
intervals. The online computer read the range
prediction, set the range gate TDG, and fired the
laser within 1psec of the integral 6-sec epoch. The
TDG activated the MSTPHC, triggered a slowsweep oscilloscope (the display being recorded
on photographic film) and a fast-sweep oscilloscope (recorded on Polaroid), and activated a
10-psec gate into the time-interval meter (TIM ) .
The computer read the number of counts in the
TIM and calculated the difference between this
reading and the range prediction, printing out

178

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

on time

"-1

1 pps 1 MHz
TO laser
control system

FIGURE - Block diagram, time standard system for system B at Lick Observatory.
7-20.

this difFerence on the teletypewriter to the nearest nanosecond. The MSTPHC range accuracy
depended on the TDG, whereas the TIM range
accuracy is entirely independent of the TDG.
The first high-confidence-level return was recorded by the MSTPHC for a 50-shot run at
approximately 2:50 Greenwich mean time
(6.m.t.) on August 20, 1969 (fig. 7-23). A part
of the corresponding TIM printouts is displayed
as a histogram in figure 7-24. Here, the origin of
the time axis is at the predicted range. The lower
histogram shows a portion of the printouts for a
50-shot run taken a few minutes later in which a
5-pec internal delay was introduced. (This delay
has been subtracted in the drawing.) Noise scans
in which the laser was fired into a calorimeter
displayed no buildup. Four other scans recording
signals were made in the 50 min before the

Moon sank too low in the sky. Operation earlier
in the night had been prevented by cloud cover.
The randomness of the difference between the
TIM printout and the ephemeris prediction enabled a statistical reduction of the data even
without the vernier circuits designed to interpolate between the 50-nsec digital intervals. The
result is a measured round-trip travel time in
excess of the Mulholland prediction by 1271.15
nsec of time at 3:00 G.m.t., August 20,1969, from
the intersection of the declination and polar axes
of the 107-in. telescope. The uncertainty corresponds to k2.5 m in one-way distance.
Return signals were again recorded on September 3 and 4, 1969, with equivalent uncertainty. Round-trip travel times were also shown
in excess of the prediction by 497t15 nsec on
September 3, 1969, at 1 1 : l O G.m.t. and by

LASER RANGING RETROREI;I,E(:'lTO11

Before -+After
Observed time relative t o computed time, p sec

FIGURE - Range residuals from system B at Lick Observatory.
7-21.

797k24 nsec on September 4, 1969, at 10:lO
G.m.t. During these observations, Tranquility
Base was in darkness, and the computer-controlled drive of the telescope was used successfully to offset from visible craters and track the
reflector.
The Lunar Ephemeris: Predictions and
Preliminary Results

The fundamental input to the calculation of
predictions for the LRRR is the lunar ephemeris,
which gives the geocentric position and velocity
of the lunar center of mass. An ephemeris is
being used that was developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and is designated LE
16. This ephemeris is believed to be far superior
in the range coordinate to any other extant
ephemeris. The available observational evidence is meager but supports this belief. The
modeling of the topocentric effects relating to
the motions of the observatory and the reflector
about the centers of mass of the respective bodies
is complete and is similar to that used in JPL
spacecraft tracking programs. Universal time
(u.t.) 1 is modeled and extrapolated by polynomials fit to the instantaneous determinations

by the U.S. Naval Observatory Time Service.
The Koziel-Mitielski model is currently being
used for the lunar librations.
Coordinates of the telescope and the reflector
package are input variables to the prediction
program. Reflector coordinates presently used
are those derived at the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center from spacecraft tracking of the
lunar module, since this dynamic determination
is essentially the inverse of the predictive problem and is, thus, more compatible than the
selenographic determinations.
It was anticipated that the topographic modeling would be the primary error source in the
earliest phase of ranging operations. This belief
was based upon the indications from command
and service module ( CSM ) tracking of Apollo 8
and Apollo 10, both of which indicated LE 16
ephemeris errors of 40 to 50 m (0.3 psec), and is
based on the knowledge that various estimates
of the selenocentric distances of surface locations
disagreed by perhaps 2 krn for a specific region.
The decision to use the dynamic determinations
of the location simplified the real-time processes
but did not relieve the radial distance uncertainty until laser acquisition was an accom-

180

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

FIGURE -Block diagram of McDonald Observatory acquisition and early measurement
7-22.
phase electronics.

F~~~~~
7-23. - M S T ~ H C
display of ~
tory acquisition.

~ 0bwrva~

plished fact. As the current "best estimate" of
the landing site shifted, predicted ranges were
affected b approximateli 4 km (28 p e e ) . Site
;
coordinates for Tranquility Base provided by the
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center on July 22,
1969, are currently being used.
Tracking information is available on both the
CSM and the lunar module during lunar surface operations. The CSM data indicate an
ephemeris error not greater than 50 m. Computations of predictions for comparison with the LM
ranging data, using the coordinates mentioned
previously, show residuals of approximately 2
km,wit11 a drift of 0.3 km in 15 min. The explanation of this anomaly is not yet known, but it
seems to be~associated with lthe tracking station
~
~
d
location.

LASER RANGING RETROREFLECTOR

Before+

After
Time, psec

FIGURE 7-24. - Histogram of single-stop TIM readings on two successive 50-shot runs on
August 20, 1969, at the McDonald Observatory.

Initial acquisition of the LRRR was accomplished with predictions based on the coordinates
of the Lick Observatory, as published in the
American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac. The
Lick Observatory 120-in. telescope used in the
experiment is actually a distance of approximately 1800 f t from that location, causing drift
in the observation residuals. The result of introducing the proper telescope coordinates into the
computations is shown in figure 7-25. The residuals relative to the new telescope coordinates
appear to be given within 1 psec. Figure 7-25 is
provisional and subject to later refinement.
Within the limitations of figure 7-25, these data
are consistent with the subsequent observations
at McDonald Observatory.
Although it is premature to discuss the data
from the standpoint of any meaningful application, one aspect invites speculation and preliminary inference. The three indirect pseudo-observations (range biases on CSM tracking data)

I
0 Observation residuals

I
-2 1
10

Resolution appropriate
to each point
I

I

12

11

I

13

u.t., hr

FIGURE7-25. -Result of using adjusted telescope coordinates for the Lick Observatory. The data are shown
for August 1, 1969.

and the first few laser acquisitions yield positive
observation residuals. If no observation selection effect is involved, this may be an indication
that the ephemeris scaling factor and hence the
lunar mean distance requires an adjustment in
the seventh place. Such a result would not be

182

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

surprising because the uncertainty in the scaling
factor is five parts in 107 (ref. 7-10), based on
the results of Mariner spacecraft tracking.
References
7-1. ALLEY,C. 0.; BENDER, L.; DICKE, R. H.;
P.
FALLER, E.; F R ~ N K EP. ,H.: PLOTKIN, H.;
J.
N
H.
and WILKINSON, T.: Optical Radar Using a
D.
Corner Reflector on the Moon. J. Geophys.
Res., vol. 70, May 1965, p. 2267.
7-2. ALLEY,C. 0.; and BENDER, L.: Information
P.
Obtainable from Laser Range Measurements to
a Lunar Corner Reflector. Symposium No. 32
of the International Astronomical Union on
Continental Drift, Secular Motion of the Pole,
and Rotation of the Earth, W. Markowitz and
B. Guinot, eds., D. Reidel Publishing Co.
(Dordrecht, Holland), 1968.
P.
D.
7-3. ALLEY,C. 0.; BENDER, L.; CURRZE, G.;
DICKE, H.; and FALLER, E.: Some ImplicaR.
J.
tions for Physics and Geophysics of Laser Range
Measurements from Earth to a Lunar RetroReflector. Proceedings of NATO Advanced
Study Institute on the Application of Modem
Physics to the Earth and Planetary Interiors,
S. K. Runcorn, ed., John Wiley & Sons (London), 1969.
G.
7-4. MACDONALD, J. F.: Implications for Geophysics
of the Precise Measurement of the Earth's Rotation. Science, 1967, pp. 157 and 204-205.
7-5, ALLEY,C. 0.; ET AL.: Laser Ranging to Optical
Retro-Reflectors on the Moon. Univ. of Maryland proposal to NASA, Dec. 13, 1965 (Rev.
Feb. 11, 1966); 'Appendix VII - Design and
Testing of Lunar Retro-Reflecting Systems by
J. E. Faller.
7-6. ALLEY,C. 0.; CHANG, F.; CURRIE,D. G.;
R.
J.
FALLER, E.; ET AL.: Confirmation of Predicted
Performance of Solid Fused Silica Optical
Corner Reflectors in Simulated Lunar Environment. Univ. of Maryland Progress Report to
NASA, Oct. 10, 1966.
D.
7-7. ALLEY,C. 0.; and CURRIE, G.: Laser Beam
Pointing Tests. Surveyor Project Final Report,
Part 2, Science Results. Jet Propulsion Laboratory NASA Tech. Rept. 32-1265, June 15, 1968.
E.
7-8. SILVERBERG, C.: An Inexpensive Multichannel
Scaler With Channel Widths of Less than One
Microsecond. Rev. of Sci. Inst., Oct. 1969.
D.
7-9. CURRIE, C..: Some Comments on Laser Ranging
Retro-Reflector Ground Stations. Univ. of Maryland Tech. Rept. 956, Sept. 4, 1968.
W.
J. D.;
7-10. MELBOURNE, G.; MULHOLLAND, ET AL.:
Constants and Related Information for Astrodynamic Calculations, 1968. Jet Propulsion Laboratory Tech. Rept. 32-1306, July 15, 1968.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Responsibility for the design and conduct of the experiment has rested with the following groups: Principal
Investigator, C. 0. Alley (University of Maryland); CoInvestigators, P. L. Bender (National Bureau of Standards), R. H. Dicke (Princeton University), J. E. Faller
( Wesleyan University), W. M. Kaula ( University of California at Los Angeles), G. J. F. MacDonald (University
of California at Santa Barbara ), J. D. Mulholland (JPL ),
H. H. Plotkin (NASA Goddard Space Flight Center),
and D. T. Wikinson (Princeton University); Participating Scientists, W. Carrion (NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center), R. F. Chang (University of Maryland), D. G.
Currie (University of Maryland), and S. K. Poultney
( University of Maryland).
The following people are responsible for the section
of this report entitled "Observations at the Lick Observatory": James Faller and Irwin Winer (Wesleyan
University); Walter Carrion, Tom Johnson, and Paul
Spadin (NASA Goddard Space Flight Center) ; and Lloyd
Robinson, E. Joseph Wampler, and Donald Wieber (Lick
Observatory, University of California). These authors of
the "Observations at the Lick Observatory" section wish
to acknowledge the efforts of Norman Anderson (Berkeley
Space Science Laboratory); Harold Adams, Raymond
Greeby, Neal Jern, Terrance Ricketts, and William Stine
(Lick Observatory); Barry Tumrose, Steve Moody, Tom
Giuffrida, Dick Plumb, and Tuck Stebbins (Wesleyan
University); and James MacFarlane, Bill Schaefer, Richard Chabot, James Hitt, and Robert Anderson (NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center). Support from funds to
the Lick Observatory by NASA grant NAS5-10752 and
National Science Foundation grant GP 6310, from funds
to Wesleyan by NASA Headquarters grant NGR-07006-005, and from in-house funds used by Goddard personnel is acknowledged.
The people who are responsible for the section of this
report entitled "Observations at the McDonald Observatory" include D. G. Currie, S. K. Poultney, C. 0.
Alley, E. Silverberg, C. Steggerda, J. Mullendore, and
J. Rayner (University of Maryland); H. H. Plotkin and
W. Williams (NASA Goddard Space Flight Center); and
Brian Warner, Harvey Richardson, and B. Bopp (McDonald Observatory). The authors of this section wish to
acknowledge the efforts of Harlan Smith, Charles Jenkins, Johnny Floyd, Dave Dittmar, Mike McCants, and
Don Wells (McDonald Observatory); Faust Meraldi,
Norris Baldwin, Charles Whitted, and Harry Kriemelmeyer (University of Maryland); and Jim Poland, Peter
Minott, Cal Rossey, Jim Fitzgerald, Walter Carrion,
&like Fitzmaurice, and Herb Richard (NASA Goddard
Space Flight Center.
Support for the activities at the McDonald Observatory
from NASA Grant NGR 21-002-109 to the University of
Maryland and from in-house funds at the Goddard Space
Flight Center is acknowledged.
J. D. Mulholland (JPL) is responsible for the section
entitled "The Lunar Ephemeris."

8. The Solar-Wind Composition Experiment
J. Geiss, P. Eberhardt, P. Signer, F. Buehler, and J. Meister

For several years, the fact has been established
that 4He2+ ions are present in the solar wind
and that the relative abundance of the ions is
highly variable (refs. 8-1 to 8-3). Helium-tohydrogen values from 0.01 to 0.25 have been
observed (ref. 8-l), but the average helium-tohydrogen ratio in the solar wind is approximately 0.04 to 0.05 (refs. 8-1 and 8 4 ) . At least
during stationary conditions, the bulk velocities
of hydrogen and helium are normally the same
to within a few percent (refs. 8-1 and 8-5). The
presence of 3He and oxygen in the solar wind
has also been reported recently (ref. 8-6). However, because these ion species were observed
only under very favorable conditions, no values
can be given for the averages and variations of
their abundance.
Plasma and magnetic field measurements of
Explorer 35 have established that, to a good
approximation, the Moon behaves like a passive
obstacle to the solar wind, and no evidence for
a bow shock has been observed (refs. 8-7 and
8-8). Thus, during the normal lunar day, the
solar-wind particles can be expected to reach the
surface of the Moon with essentially unchanged
energies. The grains of the fine lunar surface
material contain great amounts of these particles.
Consequently, it should be possible to extract
valuable information on the composition of the
solar wind from analyses of lunar surface material. However, the dust on the lunar surface
is a solar-wind collector of uncertain properties,
integrating the flux over an unknown period of
time during which relative element abundances
are probably changed significantly by both diffusion losses and saturation effects. No information on short-time variations can be derived from
solar-wind particles implanted in lunar surface
material; thus, the possibility that hydromagnetic processes influence the solar-wind composition cannot be assessed from data obtained
only from lunar surface-material analysis.

For the foregoing reasons, it appeared worthwhile to carry out an experiment in which the
solar wind would be sampled over a definite
period of time by collecting solar-wind particles
in a foil with well-defined trapping properties
(refs. 8-9 and 8-10). The Apollo Solar-WindComposition (SWC) experiment was the first
attempt at such solar-wind collecting.
P r i n c i ~ l e the Experiment
of
I

An aluminum foil sheet 30 cm wide and 140
cm long with an area of approximately 4000 cm2
was exposed to the solar wind at the lunar surface by the Apollo 1 crew. The foil was posi1
tioned perpendicular to the solar rays, exposed
for 77 min, and brought back to Earth. Solarwind particles, arriving with an energy of approximately 1 keV/nucleon, are expected to
have penetrated approximately l W 5 cm into the
foil, and a large fraction are expected to be
firmly trapped. After release from the Lunar
Receiving Laboratory ( LRL), the foil will be
analyzed for trapped solar-wind noble-gas atoms.
Parts of the foil will be melted in ultrahigh
vacuum systems, and the noble gases of solarwind origin thus released will be analyzed with
a mass spectrometer for element abundance and
isotopic composition. If, during the exposure
period, the solar wind has reached the foil with
an intensity comparable to average flux values,
then the Apollo 1 SWC experiment should
1
allow an assessment of the abundances and isotopic compositions of helium, neon, and argon,
despite the relatively short exposure time.
Instrumentation and Lunar Surface Operation

The hardware developed for the deployment
of the foil carried on the lunar module ( L M )
descent stage Modularized Equipment Stowage
Assembly is shown in figure 8-1. The hardware
consists of a five-section telescopic pole and an

184

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

aluminum foil screen rolled up on a reel. In the
outbound configuration, the reel is stored inside
the collapsed pole. The total weight is 0.95 Ib.
For deployment, the telescopic pole is extended,
and the five sections lock automatically. The reel
is then pulled out, and the foil is unrolled and
fastened to a hook near the lower end of the
pole. The reel is spring loaded to facilitate
rewinding of the foil on the reel. The pole is
pressed upright into the ground. Figure 8-2
shows the instrument as deployed by Astronaut
Edwin E. ALdrin, Jr., at the lunar surface during
the Apollo 1 extravehicular activity period.
1
When figure 8-2 was photographed, the Sun was
approximately 13' above the lunar horizon. One
hr and 17 min later, Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong
rolled up the foil on the reel. The foil (weight,
0.28 Ib) was then detached from the telescopic
pole, placed into a Teflon bag, and carried back
to Earth inside the Apollo lunar sample return
container, which also contained the documented
sample.

FIGURE8-2.-Deployed
Aldrin.

SWC unit with Astronaut

To avoid organic contamination of the lunar
surface material inside the container, the instrument was subjected to several heating cycles,
and the degree of decontamination was controlled by mass spectrometric analysis. Prior to
shipment to the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and the NASA Kennedy Space Center for
installation into the LM, the instrument was
double bagged in Teflon and heat sterilized.
The Foil and Its Solar-Wind Trapping
Properties
FIGURE - Solar-Wind Composition experiment in
8-1.
stowed configuration ready for installation in the LM.

To eliminate the possibility of contamination
of the lunar rocks in the container by the SWC
instrument, special precautions were taken. All
materials used in the construction of the reel
and foil assemblies were analyzed for 13 geochemically important trace elements (lithium,
beryllium, boron, magnesium, potassium, rubidium, strontium, yttrium, lanthanum, ytterbium,
lead, thorium, and uranium). All concentrations
were low enough to be geochemically acceptable.

Dimensions and details of the exposed foil
assembly are shown in figure 8-3. The main
part of the assembly is a 15-pm-thick aluminum
foil. The backside of the foil was anodically covered with approximately 1 pm of Alz03, to keep
the foil temperature below 100° C during exposure on the Moon. For reinforcement, the foil
was rimmed with Teflon tape.
Test pieces 1, 3, and 5 are foils that were
bombarded in the laboratory before the mission
with a known flux of neon ions with an energy
of 15 keV. The amounts of neon used were large
by comparison with the expected solar-wind
neon fluxes. Determination of the amount of
neon implanted in these test pieces will indicate

185

SOLAR-WIND COMPOSITION EXPERIMENT

tensively investigated in the laboratory. Trapping probabilities for helium, neon, and argon
were determined in a wide energy range. For
average solar-wind energies, the probabilities
are 89 percent for helium ( 3 keV), 97 percent
for neon (15 key), and 100 percent for argon
(30 keV). Because these figures are only slightly
energy dependent, they can be used even if,
during exposure, the solar-wind velocity was
quite different from the average. The trapping
probabilities were found to be independent of
foil temperature (20° to 120° C ) , and they were
not affected by simultaneous bombardment with
kiloelectron-volt hydrogen ions ( H 2 ) .
+

First Laboratory Investigations

FIGURE - Dimensions and details of the exposed foil
8-3.
assembly.

if solar-wind noble-gas losses could have occurred during the mission because of some unexpected diffusion or surface erosion processes.
Test piece 5 was mounted in a closed pocket
and remained shielded during the exposure on
the lunar surface; test pieces 1 and 3 were exposed to the solar wind. Test piece 4 was a piece
of foil taped to the backside of the main foil.
A solar-wind flux coming from a direction opposite to the Sun could be distinguished by
means of test piece 4. Test piece 2 was mounted
in a position that remained shielded from the
solar wind.
Before flight, the trapping properties of the
foil material for kiloelectron-volt ions were ex-

The SWC return assembly was kept behind
the primary biological barrier in the LRL until
the quarantine was lifted, but a 1-ft2 portion
was cut from the midsection of the foil and
sterilized inside a vacuum container by 125O C
heat for 39 hr. The vacuum container, with this
portion of the foil, was received at Berne, Switzerland, on August 12, 1969. Mass spectrometric
investigation of the gas content in the container
revealed little air leakage as indicated from the
low argon content ( 3 X
cc STP 40Ar).HOWever,
cc STP helium and
cc STP neon
were found. These gases are interpreted as having leaked, during sterilization, from lunar dust
attached to the foil.
With the unaided eye, virtually no dust particles were visible on the foil; however, microscopic investigation disclosed an appreciable
number of fine particles. Figure 8-4 shows such
dust grains, on the front side of the foil, photographed with a scanning electron microscope.
A few pieces of the foil, with areas of approximately 10 cm2 each, were subjected to a cleaning process that included ultrasonic treatments.
The noble gases were then extracted and analyzed in mass spectrometers. The presence of
helium, neon, and argon was found, and the
isotopic composition of these elements was
measured. The element abundances and the isotopic compositions were clearly nonterrestrial
and generally corresponded to the abundance
estimates in the Sun (ref. 8-11) and to estimates
derived from measurements taken in gas-rich

186

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE
8-4. - Scanning electron microscope
picture of front side of foil showing dust
grains (4800 x ).

meteorites. At the time this report was written,
September 8,1969, various procedures calculated
to decrease the dust level on the foil were in
process, with the aim of obtaining an unequivocal
distinction between solar-wind particles trapped
in the foil and noble gases contained in the finegrained lunar dust particles adhering to the foil.
References
8-1. HUNDHAUSEN,J.; ASBRIDGE, R.; BAME,S. J.;
A.
J.
GILBERT, E.; and STRONG, B.: Vela 3 SatelH.
I.
lite Observations of Solar Wind Ions: A Preliminary Report. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 72, no.
1, Jan. 1, 1967, pp. 87-99.
8-2. SNYDER, W.; and NEUGEBAUER, InterplaneC.
M.:
tary Solar-Wind Measurements by Mariner 2.
Proceedings of the Fourth International Space
Science Symposium. Vol. IV, P. Muller, ed.,
North-Holland (Amsterdam), 1964, p. 89-113.
8-3. WOLFE,J. H.; SILVA,R. W.; MCKIBBIN, D.;
D.
R.
and MATSON 11.: The Compositional, Anisotropic, and Nonradial Flow Characteristics of
the Solar Wind. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 1, no. 23,
July 1, 1966, pp. 3329-3335.
CONWAY and NEUGEBAUER,
W.;
MARCIA:
8-4. SNYDER,
The Relation of Mariner 2 Plasma Data to Solar
'F
Phenomena. The Solar Wind, R. J. Mackin and

8-5.

8-6.

8-7.

8-8.

8-9.

8-10.

8-11.

Marcia Neugebauer, eds., Pergamon Press, 1966,
p. 3.
OGILVIE, W.; BURLAGA, F.; and WILKERK.
L.
SON,T. D.: Plasma Observations on Explorer
34. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 73, no. 21, Nov. 1,
1968, pp. 6809-6824.
A.
J.
BAME,S. J.; HUNDHAUSEN,1.; ASBRIDGE, R.;
and STRONG, B.: Solar Wind Ion ComposiI.
tion. Phys. Rev. Letters, vol. 20, no. 8, Feb. 19,
1968, pp. 393-395.
LYON, F.; BRIDGE, S.; and BINSACK, H.:
E.
H.
J.
Explorer 35 Plasma Measurements in the Vicinity of the Moon. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 72,
no. 23, Dec. 1, 1967, pp. 6113-6117.
NESS,N.F.; BEH.~NNON, W.; SCEARCE, S.;
K.
C.
and CANTARANO,C.: Early Results from the
S.
Magnetic Field Experiment on Lunar Explorer
35. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 72, no. 23, Dec. 1,
1967, pp. 5769-5778.
SIGNER,
PETER; EBERHARDT,
PETER; and GEISS,
JOHANNES:
Possible Determination of the Solar
Wind Composition. J. Geophys. Res., vol. 70,
no. 9, May 1, 1965, pp. 2243-2248.
J.;
BUEHLER, GEISS,J.; MEISTER, EBERHARDT,
F.;
P.; HUNEKE, C.; and SIGNER, Trapping
J.
P.:
of the Solar Wincl in Solids. Earth Planet. Sci.
Lett., vol. 1, 1966, pp. 249-255.
ALLER,
LAWRENCE
HUGH:The Abundance of the
Elements. Interscience Publishers, 1961.

9. Lunar Surface Closeup Stereoscopic Photography
The lunar samples returned by the Apollo 1
1
mission have provided preliminary information
about the physical and chemical properties of
the Moon and, in particular, about Tranquility
Base. Because of the mechanical environment to
which lunar samples are subjected during their
return from the Moon, limited information can be
obtained from lunar samples about the structure
and texture of the loose, fine-grained material
that composes the upper surface of the lunar
crust. A stereoscopic camera capable of photographing the small-scale ( between micro and
macro) lunar surface features was suggested by
Thomas Gold, Cornell University, and built
under contract for NASA.
The photographs taken on the mission with
the closeup stereoscopic camera are of outstanding quality and show in detail the nature of the
lunar surface material. Several photographs contain unusual features. From the photographs,
information can be derived about the small-scale
lunar surface geologic features and about processes occurring on the surface. This chapter
presents a description of the closeup stereoscopic
camera, lists and shows single photos from pairs
available for stereoscopic study, and contains an
interpretation of the results reported by Professor Gold in Science, vol. 165, no. 3900, pp. 13451349, Sept. 26, 1969.

launch with sufficient Ektachrome MS ( SO368 )
film for the complete mission. To obtain a photograph, an astronaut merely sets the camera over
the material to be photographed and depresses
the trigger located on the camera handle. When
the exposure is complete, the film is automatically
advanced to the next frame, and the electronic
flash is recharged.

Apollo Lunar Surface Closeup Camera

The Apollo Lunar Surface Closeup Camera
(ALSCC), built by Eastrnan Kodak under contract to the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center,
was designed to optimize operational simplicity
(fig. 9-1). The camera is an automatic, selfpowered, twin-lens stereoscopic camera capable
of resolving objects as small as S pm in diameter
O
on color film. Simplicity of operation was achieved
by making the camera focus and the flash exposure fixed and by loading the camera prior to

FIGURE - Apollo lunar surface closeup camera.
9-1.
187

188

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

The requirement to simplify the ALSCC operation necessitated a reasonable depth of field
that could be achieved only by limiting the
image magnification produced by the system. The
camera lenses are diffraction-limited 46.12 mm
f/17 Kodak M-39 copy lenses focused for an
object distance of 184.5 mm, providing an image
magnification of 0.33. The lenses are mounted
29 mm apart, with their optical axes parallel.
The area photographed is 72 mm x 82.8 mm and
centered between the optical axes; thus, stereoscopic photographs with a base-to-height ratio of
0.16 are provided (fig. 9-2).
Location of the Stereoscopic Photographs

The specific location at the Apollo 11 lunar
landing site where individual stereoscopic photographs were taken cannot be determined with
a high degree of confidence. Because of the limited size of the area photographed by the camera, the subject material cannot be identified
within the large-scale lunar surface photography.
In the scientific debriefing of the Apollo 11

crew, Astronaut Armstrong indicated the general areas, relative to the lunar module, where
sequential sets of photographs were taken. Based
upon Astronaut Armstrong's comments and the
time history of events on the surface, the general
locations of the photographs were tentatively
established (fig. 9-3).
Description of Photographs

Analysis of the photographic data is not complete and will therefore be published in future
documents. For this report, only a preliminary
description of four photographs, provided by
Gold, is included.
A stereoscopic view (fig. 9 4 ) shows a closeup of a small lump of lunar surface powder approximately 0.5 in. across, with a splash of glassy
material over it. A drop of molten material appears to have fallen on the powder, splashed,
and frozen.
Figure 9-5 shows a clump of lunar surface
powder with various small, differently colored
pieces. Many small, shiny spherical particles can
be seen.

I
Film format: 27.64 by 24 mm

Film plane

m

TV
u ~ - X n
x
a

.k4-~

k

J

-

m

-_
-

u

10 5 0 10 20
Ft

LM rocket exhaust disturbance
Crater
* Rock
;:t;,;!3., Documented-sample area
LRRR Lunar Ranging Retroreflector
PSEP Passive Seismic Experiment Package
& Tentative location of stereoscopic photographs

FIGURE - Schematic of the ALSCC.
9-2.

FIGURE - Locations of ALSCC photographs.
9-3.

LUNAR CLOSEUP STEREOSCOPIC PHOTOGRAPHY

189

FIGURE - A small lump of lunar soil with a glazed
9-4.
top and a smaller glazed piece to the right. The larger
object shows no change of color or texture compared
with the surrounding ground, known to be soft, finegrained soil, except for the glaze mark. (NASA AS1145-6704 )

FIGURE - Stone embedded in powdery lunar surface
9-6.
material. ( NASA ASll-45-6712

Another stereoscopic view (fig. 9-6) shows a
stone, approximately 2.5 in. long, embedded in
the powdery lunar surface material. The small
pieces grouped closely around the stone suggest
that it suffered some erosion. On the surface,
several small pits are seen, mostly less than oneeighth in. in size and with a glazed surface. The
pits have a raised rim, characteristic of pits

made by high-velocity micrometeorite impacts.
One stereoscopic view (fig. 9-7) of the surface of a lunar rock shows an embedded %-in.
fragment of a different color. On the surface,
several small pits are seen, mostly less than oneeighth in, in size and with a glazed surface. The
pits have a raised rim, characteristic of pits
made by high-velocity micrometeorite impacts.

FIGURE - Clump of lunar surface powder (NASA
9-5.
ASll-45-6706)

FIGURE - Stereoscopic view (NASA ASll-45-6709)
9-7.

190

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

The stereoscopic views in figures 9-8 to 9-20
are included in this report to make the availability of the photographs known. Descriptions
or interpretation of these photographs were not
available for this publication.
These photographs are available upon request
from the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center,
Houston, Tex. The following is a listing of the
17 photograph numbers, keyed to the figure
number used in this chapter.
Photograph

AS 11-45-6704
AS1145-6706
ASll45-6712
AS 1145-6709
AS1145-6697
AS1145-6698
AS 11-45-6699
ASll45-6700
ASll45-6701
AS11-45-6702
FIGURE9-9. - Stereoscopic view ( NASA AS11-45-6698 )

FIGURE - Stereoscopic view (NASA AS11-45-6699)
9-10.

FIGURE - Stereoscopic view ( NASA ASll-45-6697 )
9-8.

LUNAR CLOSEUP STEREOSCOPIC PHOTOGRAPHY

FIGURE9-11. -This is the bottom of a crater, and the
affected area is close to the upper edge of the frame
(and re sum ably beyond). Here, glazing is seen in a
very regular fashion, with the edges and points that
face upwards and out in a direction to the upper right
consistently affected. The stereoscopic view is required to observe the directional effect. (NASA AS11FIGURE
9-13. - Stereoscopic view (NASA ASll-45-6702)

FIGURE 9-12. - Stereoscopic view ( NASA ASll-45-6701)

FIGURE 9-14.-Stereoscopic
6702-1)

view

(NASA ASll-45-

192

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

FIGURE - Stereoscopic view (NASA ASll-45-6703)
9-15.

FIGURE
9-17. - Stereoscopic view (NASA ASll-45-6707)

FIGURE - Stereoscopic view ( NASA ASll-45-6705 )
9-16.
FIGURE
9-18. - A large area of glazing is seen in the
lower left region, both on the horizontal and on the
sloping surfaces of the ~rotuberance.Some glazing is
also seen on the lower right object, with edges and
points particularly affected. In the upper part of the
picture a small glossy bead is seen poised on a narrow pedestal. (The detail in the color stereoscopic
transparencies far exceeds that which can be reproduced in the present print. ) ( NASA ASll-45-6708)

LUNAR CLOSEUP STEREOSCOPIC PHOTOGRAPHY

FIGURE
9-19. - Stereoscopic view (NASA ASll-45-6710)

FIGURE
9-20. - Stereoscopic view (NASA ASll-45-6713)

Apollo 1 1 Observations of a Remarkable
Glazing Phenomenon on the Lunar Surface

T.Gold
The Apollo 11 mission carried a closeup stereo
camera with which the astronauts took 17 pictures. Each is of an area 3 by 3 in., seen with a
resolution of approximately 80 pm. There are
many details seen in these pictures that were not

193

known previously or that could not be seen with
similar definition by Astronauts Armstrong and
Aldrin in their careful inspection of the lunar
surface. One of those is outstanding in being
wholly unexpected and possibly of consequence
not only to lunar geology but also to aspects of
the study of the Sun, the Earth, and other bodies
of the solar system.
The observation is that of glossy surfaces, in
appearance a glass of color similar to the surrounding powdery medium, lying in very particular positions. Small craters that are plentiful
on the lunar surface - 6 in. to 2 or 3 feet in
diameter - have frequently some clumps of the
lunar soil or rough spots of the surface texture
concentrated toward their center. They give the
. appearance of having been swept in at a time
later than the formation of the crater. Some of
these little lumps appear to have just their top
surfaces glazed. The glassy patches that can be
seen on the photographs range in size from X mm
to about 1 cm.
The glazed areas are clearly concentrated
toward the top surfaces of protuberances, although they exist also on some sides. Points and
edges appear to be strongly favored for the
glazing process. In some cases, droplets appear
to have run down an inclined surface for a few
millimeters and congealed there.
The astronauts' information was that similar
things were seen in many small craters, many
more than the eight instances of which we have
photographs. They were not able at the time to
pick up any of the objects for the sample return.
They did not see a single glazed piece in any
different geometrical position other than near
the center of a small crater. They were not able
to handle any of the objects, and thus have no
direct observation as to the thickness of the
glass. Since they only saw them from eye-height,
looking down at the ground in front of them,
their visual acuity would be considerably less
than that of the camera, and they could therefore not supplement the detailed information
contained in the pictures.
Several theories of the origin of this phenomenon have to be discussed.
1. An effect connected with the rocket exhaust
of the desoent stage.

194

APOLLO 1 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT
1

It might be thought that in the last phases of
the landing process the rocket flame melted some
lunar material and that this was blasted over the
surrounding terrain. While at first this seems a
very attractive hypothesis, when pursued in
more detail it runs into difficulties. These are
concerned with the regional distribution of the
objects and also with the detailed geometrical
relationships in the places where they are seen.
The astronauts noticed these objects first in a
region ahead and to one side of the landing
approach path, about 50 ft from the spacecraft.
The pattern of disturbance caused by the rocket
could be seen to extend hardly beyond the footpads of the spacecraft. The inspection of the
approach path and the region directly underneath the nozzle of the rocket showed the ground
disturbed there, but no evidence of any melting
was seen. It seems most unlikely that if melting
occurred, all molten material was blasted away,
not leaving a higher concentration near the
source.
No explanation can be found of how material
so flung out would end up concentrated in little
clumpings in the bottoms of small craters without there being also some on the flat surface or
in much shallower depressions. The material
could not be thought to have been propelled by
gas drag and to have slid over the surface, to
land perhaps in sheltered holes, since the rocket
gas-drag forces are quite inadequate at a distance of more than a few feet from the rocket.
This is substantiated by the fact that the radially
streaked pattern of the ground radiating out
from underneath the spacecraft disappears at a
distance of between 10 and 15ft. No glassy objects
could have been dragged over the surface by
this stream at a distance of 50 ft; if they had
been flung that far, they would be lying essentially where they landed, and no reason is then
seen for the specific distribution that was found.
The glassy objects were, by the astronauts'
descriptions, substantiated by the pictures,
usually found in a tight clumping, and the pictures indicate in several cases a definite common azimuth dependence of the effect among
the members of any one group. (There is no
record of the azimuth position of the camera,
so different groups cannot be compared with

each other; but the camera was generally held
facing nearly vertically downward. The astronauts were not aware of any azimuth effect, nor
could they have been expected to see it, since it
becomes evident only from a careful study of
the high-resolution pictures.)
It thus seems extremely improbable that any
effect of the rocket exhaust can be held responsible for the phenomenon.
2. Splashing of liquid drops from a larger impact elsewhere.
Many of the same objections can be raised
again here. Such droplets could not have landed
in preferential places. On impact, with the velocities necessary from a source more than a
few feet away, they would have toppled and
destroyed many of the frail structures that they
hit, and thus the geometrical relationships would
have been lost.
3. The objects are common in the ground,
where they were distributed after being created
by shock heating or volcanism. Erosion has exposed some of them.
The fact that the objects are found in the
bottoms of little craters argues against slow
erosion exposing them, for these craters are
filled up and not emptied out by the lunar surface transportation processes. There are many
cases of a clearly visible outline of the glazing,
showing shapes characteristic of viscous flow
defining that outline. One is clearly not dealing
with entirely glazed objects of which only a
certain fraction is cleaned o.ff and exposed, but
rather one is dealing with objects that are covered with a glaze mainly on top.
Small glassy spheres had been reported to be
common in the lunar soil, and many are indeed
also seen on the pictures. Their origin may be
understood merely as a consequence of meteoritic
impact melting and freezing during the ballistic
trajectory of the ejected material. If the ground
has been plowed over many times by impacts,
as suggested by the topography of the Moon, a
substantial admixture of spheres and other
shapes resulting from only partial melting must
indeed be expected in the ground. The glazed
surfaces discussed here appear not to be of this
character. Fragments of them may also appear
in the lunar soil, and those would be expected

LUNAR CLOSEUP STEREOSCOPIC PHOTOGRAPHY

to be thin pieces, shiny on one side, and rough
with embedded soil on the other.
4. They are objects created by the impact
that made the little craters in which they are
now found.
This seems impossible in view of the fact that
they are frequently quite frail struc,tures, apparently only made of the powdery material,
and they could not have survived and remained
there in definite geometrical positions when an
explosive force excavated the crater. While in a
hard rock a glazed coating may remain lining
the impact pit, this is very unlikely in a soft soil.
All material exposed to enough heat to melt
would be exposed also to aerodynamic forces
large enough to be expelled. Any glass made by
a strong pressure wave in the ground and subsequently exposed would not have glossy surfaces
except as a result of fracture. The shapes seen
are in most cases clearly the result of a surface
viscous flow and not of a fracture.
5. Radiation heating.
An intense source of radiative heating could
account for all the facts that are now known.
The wavelength of this radiation could be anywhere in the electromagnetic spectrum between
the far ultraviolet and the far infrared. For
radiative heating from a small angular source
in the sky the bottoms of craters are substantially
favored. The equilibrium temperature in a given
radiation field is likely to be between 10 and 20
percent in absolute temperature above that of
flat ground. (This problem has been discussed in
some detail by Buhl, Welch, and Rea (ref. 9-I).)
The reason for that is, of course, the diminution
of the solid angle subtended by the cold sky for
a particle in a hollow compared with one on flat
ground. There is thus an intensity range where
radiation heating will cause melting only in the
bottoms of craters. The positioning of the objects can be understood in these terms.
No significant mechanical forces would be involved, and frail structures could suffer melting
of their upper surface without being deranged.
One protuberance, for example, shows no change
in color or texture from the surrounding medium
known to be soft powder; yet it has a large
patch of glazed material over the top of it. If
the source of the heating were not directly

195

overhead, there could be a common azimuthal
preference for the melted surfaces.
Protuberances, rather than flat ground, and
sharp points and edges would be favored for
melting if the heat source existed for a short
time only. The reason for this is that heat conduction will carry less heat away from such
positions, and they would reach the temperature
corresponding to the local radiative equilibrinm
sooner than would flat surfaces. The observations
are very clear in demonstrating such an effect.
Similarly, the apparently thin coating of glaze
clearly seen in many of the pictures indicates a
short duration for the period of the radiative
heating. With the approximately known rate of
heat transfer in the lunar material, one may estimate that the duration of the heating phase was
between 10 and 100 sec.
Among the interpretations discussed here,
only radiative heating seems to be able to account for the major observational data; and it
accounts well for both the distribution over the
ground and the detailed geometrical arrangements in which the glazing is found, for it is in
just those places that the temperature would be
expected to be at a maximum. We must therefore seek clues as to the nature of such a flash
of radiation.
The time of occurrence of the flash heating
would have to have been sufficiently recent for
micrometeorites not to have destroyed the glaze,
nor for the mechanisms that redistribute the
lunar soil to have blanketed the objects. Estimates of the micrometeorite rate at the present
time vary considerably, but it seems very unlikely that the glaze could be maintained on the
surface for as much as 100000 yr and probably
not'for more than 30000. The event in question
would thus have to have taken place within this
geologically very recent past. Several possibilities have to be discussed.
a. An impact fireball on the Moon.
A large impact would no doubt generate intense radiation from the explosive gas cloud.
This radiation will, however, be largely screened
from reaching areas outside the crater made by
the impact, and it seems unlikely that high radiation intensities would extend over regions beyond those swept over by the explosive action

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

196

or the expelled material. Craters would be particularly unfavorable locations for such a source
of heat, rather than highly favored as the observations show.
b. An impact fireball on the Earth.
Although very large impacts may have taken
place on the Earth within geologic time, and
may indeed be responsible for some of the widespread falls of tektites, no really major event is
thought to have occurred within the sufficiently
recent past. The energy released in an impact
on the Earth of a 1-km meteorite at a velocity of
20 km/sec is of the order of 3 X loz7 ergs and
that, if it were all converted into radiation,
would deposit on the order of 4 X lo5 ergs/cm2
on the lunar surface. The value required to cause
the observed effect is of the order of 3 X lo9
ergs/cm 2. No fireball of adequate intensity
seems to have existed on the Earth within the
last hundred thousand years.
c. A flash from the Sun.
One can calculate the increase in the solar
emission that would be required to cause melting in favorable places on the lunar surface.
The normal noontime temperature on the lunar
equator is known to be approximately 394O K.
The analysis of Buhl et al. (ref. 9-1) shows that
the absolute temperature in the bottom of a
hemispherical crater must be expected to rise
1
about 1 percent above that of the surrounds.
The normal noontime temperature would thus
be 437O K in such locations. If f is the factor by
which the solar luminosity is increased, we require that

f

=

(S)'
.
-,

where Tm is the melting temperature and TO
the normal temperature in the same location.
If we adopt a melting temperature of the lunar
surface material of 1400° K, an appropriate
figure for basalt, the value of f would be 106.
The temperature of the flat ground in the same
radiation field would then be 1260' K. (For a
brief flash the fact that a crater bottom started
out 40° hotter would further increase the margin
between melting there and elsewhere.)
The flash heating, if it originated from the
Sun, overhead at the time in the lunar region in
question, thus requires that the Sun's luminosity

flared up for a period of between 10 and 100 sec
to a luminosity of more than 100 times its present value. What could be the origin of such a
flareup?
Solar flares, as they are known at the present
time, only reach a total energy output of less
than
ergs. The quantity we are discussing
ergs for an isotropic
here is at least 4 X
source, or 2 X 103%rgs for a localized source
on the Sun that radiates into a hemisphere only.
While it cannot be ruled out completely that
flares of such an intensity could occur, we have
no evidence in this regard, although some earlier
speculations exist (ref. 9-2).
The phenomenon may not be in the nature of
a flare, but in the nature of a very minor novalike
outburst of the Sun. The nova phenomenon
among the stars is not understood, but it is normally concerned with a different class of star, and
the intensity of the outburst, up to 100 times the
normal luminosity, for a period of only tens of
seconds every few tens of thousands of years,
would be a phenomenon that would not have
been recognized astronomically among stars of
the solar type. One can therefore not completely
rule out the possibility that stars like the Sun do
have occasional instabilities of internal origin,
but very much weaker than the novae.
The infall into the Sun of a comet or asteroid
is another possibility.' An object falling into the
Sun at the velocity of escape would have to have
a mass of 3 X 10" g for the kinetic energy to be
sufficient to generate the flash. This would put
the object into the class of asteroids or very large
cometary cores.
For the infalling energy to be converted into
radiation in its entirety, it would be necessary
for the object to break up in the solar atmosphere,
and for no substantial pieces to remain intact at
the level of the photosphere. Tidal disruption
and violent heating could perhaps be invoked to
break up a cometary body more readily than an
asteroidal one. Also, comets have been known to
approach the Sun very closely in historical times,
and the statistical evidence would be that many
have hit the Sun in a period of 30 000 years. The
mass required ( 3 X 1021g ) is above that which
has been guessed at for presently known comets.
'suggested by F. Hoyle.

LUNAR CLOSEUP STEREOSCOPIC PHOTOGRAPHY

An icy cometary core would have to have a
radius of approximately 100km, while some presently known comets2 may have cores as large as
50 km. The suggestion that the flash was due to
an infalling comet seems to merit further attention.
If such a flash occurred on the Sun within
geologically recent times, there are many other
consequences that may perhaps be recognized on
the Earth or other planets. If the flash occurred
as a result of an infalling object, or of a superflare, or of an internal outburst that exposed subphotospheric material, its spectrum would be
mainly in the ultraviolet. So far as the Earth is
concerned, the total extra heat delivered would
be mainly spread in the atmosphere and does not
cause a substantial rise in the temperature of the
lower atmosphere. The heat delivered to the
ground is not likely to have been enough to cause
any permanent effects. Nevertheless, there may
be effects in the geologic record that can be
attributed to such an event. The upper atmosphere of the Earth and of Venus, and the entire
atmosphere of Mars, would, however, have been
seriously affected. On the Earth, the ratio of
3He and *He in the outer atmosphere suggests
that there is no substantial preferential loss by
slow evaporation of 3He (refs. 9 3 and 9 4 ) . If
the outer atmosphere were entirely swept away
by such outbursts, then the present ratio, which
implies an absence of a preferential thermal
evaporation at normal temperatures of 3He,
would be more readily understood. The apparent absence of nitrogen on Mars, as reported
from the data of the Mariner 6 and 7 flights,
could also be understood if the entire atmosphere
had been swept away and, in the short time
since, had been replenished only from the constituents frozen out on the polar cap, which may
be CO2, but not nitrogen3
*F. Whipple, private communication.
3Suggested by C. Sagan.

197

Flash heating on the surface of Mercury would
have been much more intense, and if made of
lunar-type rock, almost an entire hemisphere
would have been glazed. We do not know the
surface material, nor the effects of erosion and
solar irradiation on Mercury, and the absence
now of a glazed hemisphere could be understood
as due to a different material or a faster destruction of glass on Mercury than on the Moon.
No doubt many more facts will come to light
concerning the lunar surface and, perhaps, this
phenomenon, in the analysis of the lunar samples
brought back by Apollo 11. A rapid publication
of these findings was nevertheless indicated by
the urgency to make the best possible scientific
preparations for the next Apollo flights.
A more complete review of this and other information contained in the closeup pictures will
be published later.

References
9-1. BUHL, D.; WELCH,W. J.; and REA, D. G.: J.
Geophys. Res., vol. 73, 1968, p. 5281.
9-2. GOLD,T.: In Semaine $Etude sur le Probleme du
Rayonnement Cosmique dans l'Espace Interplanetaire (Pontificiae Academiae Scientiarum
Scripta Varia, Vatican), 1963, pp. 159-174.
9-3. MACDONALD, J. F.: Rev. Geophys., vol. 1, 1963,
G.
p. 305.
W.
9-4. AXFORD, I.: J. Geophys. Res., vol. 73, 1968, p.
6855.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am indebted to the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration for arranging for the construction and
deployment of the closeup camera; to E. Purcell, E.
Land, J. Baker, R. Scott, and F. Pearce for their contributions in outlining this camera project; to Eastman
Kodak for the design and fabrication of the instrument;
and chiefly to N. Armstrong for his successful use of it,
and his escellent descriptions of all relevant lunar s u r
face observations made by himself and E. Aldrin. Work
on the lunar closeup camera and the analysis of photographs obtained with it is supported at Cornell under
NASA Contract Number NAS9-9017. I am grateful to
F. Hoyle, F. L. Whipple, G. J. F. MacDonald, and S.
Soter for helpful discussions.

7 .The M o d i f i e d
0

Dust Detector in the Early Apollo
Scientific Experiments Package
J. R. Bates, S. C. Freden, and B. J. O'Brien

The modified dust detector (fig. 10-1) in the
Early Apollo Scientific Experiments Package
(EASEP) consists of three n-on-p silicon solar
cells mounted on the top horizontal surface of
the dust-detector housing. The objectives of the
dust-detector experiment, which is also referred
to as the Dust, Thermal, and Radiation Engineering Measurements Package (DTREM I), are
to measure dust accumulation resulting from the
LM ascent or from any long-term cause and to
measure radiation degradation of the voltage
output from the solar cells. The radiation degradation is caused by solar-flare particle events.

The concept of radiation measurement by a
dust detector is fairly straightforward. Radiation
degradation of the voltage output from a solar
cell is predictable. If a glass shield is placed over
the surface of a solar cell, particles above certain
energies will damage the cell. The particle
energy required to damage the cells is determined by the thickness of the glass shield.
A preliminary analysis of data received in the
Mission Control Center (MCC) on the first lunar
day that the experiment was operational showed
no appreciable cell degradation caused by dust
or debris from the LM ascent. Shadows from the
antenna, the antenna alining pole, and the carry;Cell (0.15-mm fused silica shield)
ing handle (fig. 10-2) were evident on the dustdetector outputs from day 205.5 to day 208 (figs.
,Cell (0.50-mm shield)
10-3 and 10-4).
In the preliminary analysis, the voltage outbase at two places,
puts from the solar cells on the dust detector
behind outer cells
were 10 percent less at lunar noon than prelaunch predictions had indicated. These lowerthan-predicted voltage outputs may have been
caused by dust, but they may also have been a
result of errors in the prelaunch calibration
measurements of the cells and errors in the calibration data used in the MCC. Figures 10-3 and
10-4 are samples of the real-time data received
Nylon
in the MCC.
The maximum temperature of the solar cells
on the dust detector during the first lunar day of
by 0.05-mm micaply
aluminized
jemperature
the experiment was approximately 104' C. Howpolyester
sensor, nickel
ever, this temperature was recorded after lunar
film,
resistance i n
noon, and shadowing of the dust detector (from
20 layers
Fiberglas
thick
matrix,
the antenna, the antenna alining pole, and the
painted with
carrying handle) occurred just before lunar
S 13G ~ a i n t
noon. Without shadowing, the temperature
might have been 5' to 10' C higher.
FIGURE
10-1. - Dust, Thermal, and Radiation Engineering
The dust-detector data obtained during the
Measurement Package (modified dust-detector experisunset period of the lunar day appear to be
1
ment) on the Apollo 1 EASEP.

APOLLO 11 PRELIMINARY SCIENCE REPORT

200

,,Antenna
Passive Seismic
Experiment Package:

(Astronaut handle

I

:

racket:

I

'Carrying
handle

thermometer
(DTREM I )

FIGURE
10-2. - Deployed configuration of the Passive
Seismic Experiment Package showing the geometry of
the DTREM I.

o

AX04 cell voltage, bare
AX05 cell voltage, 6 mV

0

(202)

(203)

(204)

(205)

(206)

I

I

I

1

I

20
(70)

30
(60)

40
(50)

50
(40)

60
(30)

(207)
I

(208)
Days
I

AX06 cell voltage, 20 mV

(209)
I

I

(210)
I

(211)
I

90
100
110
120
70
80
(10)
(0)
(20)
(30)
(10)
(20)
S u n angle with respect to the horizon, deg
(Degrees with respect to the perpendicular)

FIGURE
10-3. - Dust-detector solar-cell output.

(212)

(213)

(214)

(215)

I

I

I

I

I

130
(40)

140
(50)

150
(60)

160
(70)

170
(80)

MODIFIED DUST DETECTOR

0 AX01 cell 1
AX02 cell 2

I

(202)

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

2
(203)

3
(204)

4
(205)

5
(206)

6
(207)

7
(208)

8
(209)

9
(210)

10
(211)

11
(212)

12
(213)

13
(214)

14
(215)

Days
I

I

I

I

I

I

20
(70)

30
(60)

40
(50)

50
(40)

60
(30)

I

I

I

I

I

I

120
100
110
80
90
70
(20)
(30)
(0)
(10)
(20)
(10)
Sun angle with respect to the horizon, deg
(Degrees with respect to the perpendicular)

I

130
(40)

I

140
(50)

I

150
(60)

I

160
(70)

I

170
(80)

FIGURE
10-4. - Dust-detector solar-cell temperature.

slightly offset from similar data obtained during
the sunrise period. This slight offsetting may
have been caused by the dust detector being
tilted 2 O to So from the horizontal, by the nonzero declination of the Sun, or by both. Also,
during sunset, the reflections and scattered light
from the surrounding EASEP components are
different from the reflections and scattered light
during sunrise.

To detect degradation of the solar cells, data
obtained on the first lunar day of the experiment
will be compared with data obtained on successive lunar days. After sufficient data have been
accumulated, a detailed analysis and establishment of baseline conditions will be made by
using off-line computer routines that contain
exact calibration data.

APPENDIX A
Glossary of Terms
ablation - removal; wearing away.
albedo -ratio of light reflected to light incident on a surface.
arcuate -in the form of a bow.
augite - a mineral consisting of an aluminous, usually
black or dark-green, variety of pyroxene.
basalt - a dark-gray to black, dense to fine-grained igneous rock consisting of basic plagioclase, augite, and
usually magnetic with olivine or basalt glass (or both)
sometimes present.
bleb - small bit or particle of distinctive material.
botryoidal - having the form of a bunch of grapes.
breccia - a rock consisting of sharp fragments embedded
in a fine-grained matrix.
clast - rock composed of fragmental material of specified
types.
clino-pyroxene - a mineral occurring in monoclinic, short,
thick, prismatic crystals, varying in color from white to
dark green or black (rarely blue).
coud6 focus -focus at a &xed place along the polar axis
of a telescope.
cristobalite - silica occurring in white octahedra.
diabase - a fine-grained igneous rock of the composition
gabbro, but with lath-shaped plagioclase crystals
enclosed wholly or in part in later formed augite.
dike -tabular igneous rock that has been injected (while
molten) into a fissure.
diktytaxitic - volcanic rock of clastic appearance.
equant -having crystals with equal or nearly equal diameters in all directions.
euhedral- refers to minerals whose crystals have had no
interference in growth.
exfoliation - the process of breaking loose thin concentric
shells or flakes from a rock surface.
feldspathic - pertaining to feldspar.
fines -very small particles in a mixture of various sizes.
gabbro - a granular igneous rock composed essentially of
calcic plagioclase, a ferromagnesian mineral, and accessory minerals.
hackly - rough; jagged; broken.
holocrystalline - consisting entirely of crystals.
ilmenite - a usually massive, iron-black mineral of submetallic luster.
induration -hardening.
Kapton - insulating material used in the construction of
the lunar module.

lithic - of, relating to, or made of stone.
mafic plutonic complexes -dark crystalline minerals characterized by magnesium and iron; formed by solidification of molten magma.
mascons -areas of mass concentrations of the Moon.
microlite -mineral consisting of an oxide of sodium, calcium, and tantalum with small amounts of fluorine and
hydroxyl.
olivine - a mineral consisting of a silicate of magnesium
and iron.
ophitic - lath-shaped plagioclase crystals enclosed in
augite.
peridotites - any of a group of granitoid igneous rocks
composed of olivine and usually other ferromagnesian
minerals, but with little or no feldspar.
pigeonite - a monoclinic mineral consisting of pyroxene
and rather low calcium, little or no aluminum or femc
iron, and less ferrous iron than magnesium.
plagioclase - a triclinic feldspar.
platy - consisting of plates or flaky layers.
pycnometer - a standard vessel for measuring and comparing the densities of liquids or solids.
pyroxene - a mineral occurring in monoclinic short, thick,
prismatic crystals or in square cross section; often laminated, varying in color from white to dark green or
black (rarely blue).
.
.
pyroxenite - an igneous rock that contains no olivine and
is composed essentially of pyroxene.
regolith -the layer of fragmental debris that overlies
consolidated bedrock.
shards - angular curved fragments.
subhedral - incompletely bounded by crystal planes.
terra - an area on the lunar surface that is relatively
higher in elevation and lighter in color than the maria.
The terra is characterized by a rough texture formed
by intersecting or overlapping large craters.
traverse map - a map made from a series of movements
that are joined end to end and are completely determined as to length and azimuth.
troilite - a mineral that is native ferrous sulfide.
twinned - refers to two craters with overlapping rims.
vesicle - a small cavity in a mineral or rock ordinarily
produced by expansion of vapor in the molten mass.
vug - a small cavity in a rock.

APPENDIX B
Acronyms
ALSCC - Apollo Lunar Surface Closeup Camera
ALSEP - Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package
ALSRC - Apollo Lunar Sample Return Container
BRN - Brown & Root-Northrop
CAPCOM - capsule communicator
CM - command module
CRA - Crew Reception Area
CSM - command and service module
DPS - descent propulsion system
DTREM I - Dust, Thermal, and Radiation Engineering
Measurements Package
EASEP - Early Apollo Scientific Experiments Package
e.d.t. - eastern daylight time
EVA - extravehicular activity
g.e.t. - ground elapsed time
JPL - Jet Propulsion Laboratory
KSC - Kennedy Space Center
LEC - Lunar Equipment Conveyor
LM - lunar module
LP - long period
LPZ - vertical-component seismometer
LRL - Lunar Receiving Laboratory
LRRR - Laser Ranging Retroreflector

MCC - Mission Control Center
MESA - Modularized Equipment Storage Assembly
A4IT - Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MQF - Mobile Quarantine Facility
MSC - Manned Spacecraft Center
MSTPHC - multistop time-to-pulse height converter
NASA - National Aeronautics and Space Administration
ORNL - Oak Ridge National Laboratory
PET - Preliminary Examination Team
PLSS -portable life support system
PSEP - Passive Seismic Experiments Package
RCL - Radiation Counting Laboratory
SL - Sample Laboratory
SM - service module
SP - short period
SRC - sample return container
STP - standard temperature and pressure
SWC - Solar-Wind Composition
TDG - time-delay generator
TIM - time-interval meter
TV - television
USGS - U.S. Geological Survey
u.t. - universal time

I

NATIONAL
AERONAUTICS SPACE ADMINISTRATION
AND
WASHINGTON, C. 20546
D.

I

FIRST CLASS MAIL

OPFICIAL BUSINESS

POSTAGE AND FEES PAID

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AN?
SPACE ADMINISTRATION

D3U 061 55
I

5 1 305
69321 0.0903
rAIR F O R C E WEAPONS LABORATO~RY/WLIL./
I
K I R T L A N D A I R FORCE B A S E * NEW M E X.I-C O 87111

t

ATT

El LOU BOWMAN, CHIEF,TECH-

LIBRARY
-L

II
1

.&
.

POSTMASTER: If Undeliverable (Section 158
Postal Manual) Do Not Return

:,
*

."The aeronatitical a d spdce activities of the Lhited Stdtes shall be
condztcted so as to c o n t r i b ~ e. . . to the expansion of hu71aalz kaowledge of phenomena igz the af?uosphere and space. T h e Administration
shall provide for the widest practicable alzd appropriate dissenzination
of infpri~~ntion
concerping* ii$ activities dnd the resalts' thereof!'
-N+TION~L

AEROI~AUTICS SPACE
AND
ACTOF 1958

NASA SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS
,

..

.L

.

TECHNICAL REPORTS: Scientific and
,
technical information considered important,
complete, and a lasting contribution to existlng
knowledge.
+
TECHNICAL NOTES: Inforniation less broad
in scope but nevertheless of importance as a
contribution to existing knowledge.
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUMS:
Information receiving limited distribution
beci~ise preliminary data, security classificaof
tion, or other reasons.

'CONTRACTOR REPORTS : Scientific and
technical information generated under a NASA
contract or grant and considered an important.
contribution to existing knowledge.

TECHNICAL TRANSLATIONS: Information
published in a foreign language considered
to merit NASA distribution in English.
SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS: Information
derived from or of value to NASA activities.
Publications include conference proceedings,
monographs, data compilations, handbooks,
sourcebooks, and special bibliographies.
.
TECHNOLOGY UTILIZATION
PUBLICATIONS: Information on technology
used by NASA that may be of particular
interest in commercial and other non-aerospace
applications. Publications include Tech Briefs,
~~~~~~l~~~
utilization ~
~
~
Technology Surveys. .

Details on the availability of these publications miy be obtained from: . .'

.
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL INFORMATION DIVISION
.

,

. ,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SFACE ADMINISTRATION
Washington,

D.C. 90546

~

~

